of

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Independent review of gender
identity services for children
and young people: Final report
April 2024

4

The copyright holder has consented to third parties republishing
the material contained in this report. Where any material, or the
copyright in such material, is identified as being owned by a third
party you will need to obtain permission from that third party
before republishing such material.
5

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Contents

6

Foreword from the Chair

12

About this report

16

Language

18

Summary and recommendations

20

Key points and recommendations

23

Interim report

25

Understanding the patient cohort

26

Clinical approach and management

27

Assessment

28

Diagnosis

29

Individualised care plan

30

Psychological interventions

30

Social transition

31

Medical pathways

32

Long-term outcomes

33

Challenges in clinical decision making

34

Service model

36

Workforce

37

Training and education

38

Service improvement

39

Clinical research capacity

40

Pathways

41

Pathways within the service

41

Transfer to adult gender services

42

Detransition

43

Private provision

43

NHS number

44

Implementation

44

Wider system learning

45

Contents

Approach

46

1. Methodology

47

Understanding evidence

47

Building on evidence

52

Stakeholder engagement

60

Summary

64

Context

66

2. History of gender services for children and young people

67

Early gender services for children and young people

67

Emergence of the Dutch protocol

68

Move to an affirmative model

70

Use of puberty blockers in the UK

70

3. Why this Review?

75

NHS England Policy Working Group (PWG)

75

NICE evidence reviews

75

Commissioning of the Independent Review

77

4. Wider context

78

Bell v Tavistock

78

Care Quality Commission (CQC) report

79

Interim report and subsequent developments

80

Understanding the patient cohort

82

5. Changes in the patient profile

84

Sources of information

84

Demographics

85

Gender characteristics

90

Co-occurring conditions

90

Changes in the patient profile

97

6. Developmental considerations for children and adolescents

98

Changes from adolescence into adulthood

102

7. Growing up in the 2000s

106

Generational beliefs and gender identity

106

Online stressors and harm

109

Mental health in children and adolescents

110

7

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

8

8. Possible factors influencing the change in patient profile

114

Biological factors

114

Psychosocial factors

117

Conclusion

121

Clinical approach & clinical management

124

9. International practice and guidelines

126

Guideline appraisal

126

Key points of learning for the NHS

132

10. Assessment and diagnosis

134

International practice

134

NHS practice

136

Perspectives from service users and families

138

Holistic assessment framework

139

Formulation, diagnosis and care plan

143

11. Psychological and psychosocial interventions

150

Perspectives from service users and families

151

International guidelines and practice

152

Understanding the evidence

153

Current NHS practice

154

Summary - psychological and psychosocial interventions

155

12. Social transition

158

International practice

158

Reflections from the Multi-Professional Review Group

159

Perspectives from service users and families

159

Understanding the evidence

161

Summary - social transition

163

13. Medical pathways

166

Perspectives from service users and families

166

Existing endocrine practice in the UK

167

International practice

170

Summary - medical pathways

171

14. Puberty blockers

172

Normal pubertal development

172

Rationale for the use of puberty blockers for gender dysphoria

173

International practice

174

Understanding intended benefits and risks of puberty blockers

175

Summary - puberty blockers

179

Contents

15. Masculinising/feminising hormones

182

International practice

182

Understanding the evidence

183

Key considerations

184

16. Challenges in clinical decision making

192

Assessing whether a treatment is clinically indicated

193

Best evidence and information

194

Competency and capacity to consent

195

Best interests of the child/young person

196

Conclusion

196

Service model

198

17. Existing service models

200

NHS England’s interim service - establishing Phase 1 providers

201

International practice

202

Different service models in the NHS

204

18. A new model for gender services for children and young people

206

Summary - service model

210

Workforce

211

Training and education

212

Service improvement

214

Research capacity

215

19. Pathways

217

International practice

217

Current referral pathway

217

Recommended referral pathway

220

Pathways within the service

223

Discharge

224

Detransition

227

Private provision

227

Changing NHS number and access to healthcare

228

20. Implementation

230

Wider system learning

231

Final thoughts from the Chair

232

9

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Glossary

234

References

248

Appendices

264

Appendix 1

264

Appendix 2

268

Appendix 3

270

Appendix 4

272

Appendix 5

274

Appendix 6

276

Appendix 7

278

Appendix 8

280

Appendix 9

282

Appendix 10

286

Appendix 11

288

Appendix 12

290

10

Contents

This page is intentionally left blank
11

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Foreword from the Chair

“Medicine’s ground state is uncertainty.
Wisdom - for both the patients and doctors
- is defined by how one copes with it.”
Atul Gawande, Complications (2002)
Dr Hilary Cass

This Review is not about defining what it means
to be trans, nor is it about undermining the
validity of trans identities, challenging the right
of people to express themselves, or rolling back
on people’s rights to healthcare. It is about what
the healthcare approach should be, and how
best to help the growing number of children and
young people who are looking for support from
the NHS in relation to their gender identity.
The Review has not been conducted in a
vacuum. There have been many moving parts
and a significant, often challenging public
debate. I have been buffeted by different issues
along the way but have tried to remain focused
on my remit.

12

One of the great pleasures of the Review
has been getting to meet and talk to so many
interesting people. I want to thank all those who
have generously given their time to share their
stories, experiences and perspectives. I have
spoken to transgender adults who are leading
positive and successful lives, and feeling
empowered by having made the decision to
transition. I have spoken to people who have
detransitioned, some of whom deeply regret
their earlier decisions. I have spoken to many
parents, with very different perspectives.
Some have fought to get their children onto a
medical pathway and have spoken about how
frustrated they have felt to have to battle to get
support. Others have felt a medical pathway

Foreword from the Chair

was entirely the wrong decision for their child
and have described their dismay about actions
taken without their consent and in ignorance
of the various other difficulties their child may
have been through, such as loss of a parent,
traumatic illness, diagnosis of neurodiversity
and isolation or bullying in school.
As well as hearing from those with lived
experience, I have spoken to a very wide
range of clinicians and academics. Clinicians
who have spent many years working in gender
clinics have drawn very different conclusions
from their clinical experience about the best way
to support young people with gender-related
distress. Some feel strongly that a majority of
those presenting to gender services will go on
to have a long-term trans identity and should be
supported to access a medical pathway at an
early stage. Others feel that we are medicalising
children and young people whose multiple
other difficulties are manifesting through gender
confusion and gender-related distress.
One thing unites all these people; they all
believe passionately in what they have told
me, and those with either parental or clinical
responsibility for children and young people are
trying their very best to do what they feel is the
right thing to support them.
Despite the best intentions of everyone with a
stake in this complex issue, the toxicity of the
debate is exceptional. I have faced criticism
for engaging with groups and individuals who
take a social justice approach and advocate
for gender affirmation, and have equally been
criticised for involving groups and individuals
who urge more caution. The knowledge and
expertise of experienced clinicians who have
reached different conclusions about the best
approach to care are sometimes dismissed
and invalidated.

There are few other areas of healthcare where
professionals are so afraid to openly discuss
their views, where people are vilified on social
media, and where name-calling echoes the
worst bullying behaviour. This must stop.
Polarisation and stifling of debate do nothing to
help the young people caught in the middle of
a stormy social discourse, and in the long run
will also hamper the research that is essential
to finding the best way of supporting them to
thrive.
This is an area of remarkably weak evidence,
and yet results of studies are exaggerated or
misrepresented by people on all sides of the
debate to support their viewpoint. The reality is
that we have no good evidence on the long-term
outcomes of interventions to manage genderrelated distress.
It often takes many years before strongly
positive research findings are incorporated into
practice. There are many reasons for this. One
is that doctors can be cautious in implementing
new findings, particularly when their own clinical
experience is telling them the current approach
they have used over many years is the right one
for their patients. Quite the reverse happened
in the field of gender care for children. Based
on a single Dutch study, which suggested that
puberty blockers may improve psychological
wellbeing for a narrowly defined group of
children with gender incongruence, the practice
spread at pace to other countries. This was
closely followed by a greater readiness to start
masculinising/feminising hormones in midteens, and the extension of this approach to a
wider group of adolescents who would not have
met the inclusion criteria for the original Dutch
study. Some practitioners abandoned normal
clinical approaches to holistic assessment,
which has meant that this group of young
people have been exceptionalised compared
to other young people with similarly complex
presentations. They deserve very much better.
13

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

On a personal note, I would like to talk through
this foreword to the children and young people
at the heart of this Review. I have decided not to
write to you separately because it is important
that everyone hears the same message. Some
of you have been really clear that you want
much better advice on the options available
to you and the risks and benefits of different
courses of action and will be pleased by what
you will read in this report. Others of you have
said you just want access to puberty blockers
and hormones as quickly as possible, and
may be upset that I am not recommending
this. I have been very mindful that you may be
disappointed by this. However, what I want to
be sure about is that you are getting the best
combination of treatments, and this means
putting in place a research programme to look
at all possible options, and to work out which
ones give the best results. There are some
important reasons for this decision.
Firstly, you must have the same standards of
care as everyone else in the NHS, and that
means basing treatments on good evidence.
I have been disappointed by the lack of
evidence on the long-term impact of taking
hormones from an early age; research has let
us all down, most importantly you. However,
we cannot expect you to make life-changing
decisions in a vacuum without being able to
weigh their risks and benefits now and in the
long-term, and we have to build the evidencebase with good studies going forward. That
is why I am asking you to join any research

14

studies that look at the longer-term outcomes
of these interventions so you can help all those
coming behind you. We have to show that the
treatments are safe and produce the positive
outcomes you want from them. People in
research studies often do better than people
who are on regular treatment because they get
the chance to try new approaches, as well as
getting much closer follow-up and support.
Secondly, medication is binary, but the fastest
growing group identifying under the trans
umbrella is non-binary, and we know even less
about the outcomes for this group. Some of
you will also become more fluid in your gender
identity as you grow older. We do not know the
‘sweet spot’ when someone becomes settled in
their sense of self, nor which people are most
likely to benefit from medical transition. When
making life-changing decisions, what is the
correct balance between keeping options as
flexible and open as possible as you move into
adulthood, and responding to how you feel right
now?
Finally, I know you need more than medical
intervention, but services are really stretched,
and you are not getting the wider support you
need in managing any mental health problems,
arranging fertility preservation, getting help
with any challenges relating to neurodiversity,
or even getting counselling to work through
questions and issues you may have. We need
to look at all the elements that are needed in
a package of care that will help you thrive and
fulfil your broader life goals.

Foreword from the Chair

The first step for the NHS is to expand
capacity, offer wider interventions, upskill the
broader workforce, take an individualised,
personal approach to care, and put in place
the mechanisms to collect the data needed for
quality improvement and research.
Expanding capacity at all levels of the system
will not only allow for more timely care and
space to explore, but also free-up the specialist
services for those who need them most. I
know there are many who have waited too long
already and will continue to do so, and that like
me, colleagues across the NHS are deeply
concerned about this. We can’t fix everything
overnight, but we must make a start.
I would also like to share some thoughts with
all my clinical colleagues. We have to start from
the understanding that this group of children
and young people are just that; children and
young people first and foremost, not individuals
solely defined by their gender incongruence or
gender-related distress. We have to cut through
the noise and polarisation to recognise that
they need the same standards of high-quality
care to meet their needs as any other child or
young person. When you talk to these young
people and their parents/carers, they want the
same things as everyone else: the chance to
be heard, respected and believed; to have their
questions answered; and to access help and
advice. It is only when they have been on very
long waiting lists, and sidelined from usual care
in local services, that they are forced to do their
own research and may come to a single medical
answer to their problems.

As experienced clinicians, you are familiar with
dealing with complexity in presentation, but for
this group of young people expertise has been
concentrated in a small group of people, which
has served to gatekeep the knowledge. We
have heard many clinical staff question their
capacity and capability and this has made them
nervous about working within this population.
I know you just need the appropriate training,
support and most importantly the confidence to
do what you have been trained to do and treat
this population as you would any other young
person in distress.
In conducting this Review I have had to make
recommendations based on the currently
available information. I am very aware that
this is a point in time and as new evidence is
gathered different insights might emerge. I have
recommended a service model that has inbuilt
mechanisms to be able to evolve and adapt with
the emerging research overseen by appropriate
governance structures both within individual
NHS organisations and at a national level.
It is not just children and young people
with gender-related distress who are facing
emotional and social challenges, but the wider
population of adolescents. We can only do our
job by being ambitious for all children and young
people and prioritising development of services
to meet their broader needs.

Dr Hilary Cass, OBE

15

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

About this report
The Independent Review of Gender Identity Services for Children and Young People
was commissioned by NHS England to make recommendations on the questions
relating to the provision of these services as set out in the terms of reference.
The Review has been forward looking. Its role was to consider how the current clinical
approach and service model should be improved. In order to do this, it has been
necessary to understand the current landscape and why change is needed, so that
any future model addresses existing challenges.
This report is primarily for the commissioners and providers of services for children
and young people needing support around their gender. However, because of the wide
interest in this topic, effort has been made to make it as accessible as possible, while
also representing the data which are sometimes detailed and complex.
The Review is cognisant of the broader cultural and societal debates relating to the
rights of transgender people. It is not the role of the Review to take any position on
the beliefs that underpin these debates. Rather, this Review is strictly focused on the
clinical services provided to children and young people who seek help from the NHS
to resolve their gender-related distress.
The report has five parts:

1. Approach
2. Context
3. Understanding the patient cohort
4. Clinical approach and clinical management
5. Service model

16

About this report

Throughout, the Review has focused on hearing a wide range of perspectives
to better understand the challenges within the current system and aspirations for
how these could be addressed. This report does not contain all that we have heard
but summarises consistent themes, using direct quotes to illustrate points made,
where appropriate.
The report includes findings from the systematic reviews commissioned to
inform the work. The full peer reviewed papers are available with open access
at https://adc.bmj.com/pages/gender-identity-service-series.
The report represents a point in time and draws conclusions and makes
recommendations based on the evidence that is currently available.
The Review is independent of the NHS and Government and neither required
nor sought approval or sign-off of this report’s contents prior to publication.

17

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Language
Labels can be confusing; young people sometimes find them helpful and sometimes
find them stigmatising. There is no consensus on the best language to use around
this subject. The language surrounding this area has also changed rapidly and young
people have developed varied ways of describing their experiences using different
terms and constructs that are relevant to them.
The Review tries as far as possible to use language and terms that are respectful
and acknowledge diversity, but that also accurately describe the complexity of what
we are trying to articulate.
The terms used may not always feel right to some; nevertheless, it is important
to emphasise that the language used is not an indication of a position being taken
by the Review. A glossary of terms is included. Key definitions are:
Gender incongruence is the term used in the International Classification of Diseases
Eleventh Revision (ICD-11) (World Health Organization, 2022) to describe “a marked
and persistent incongruence between an individual’s experienced gender and the
assigned sex”. It has been moved out of the “Mental and behavioural disorders”
chapter and into the “Conditions related to sexual health” chapter so that it is not
perceived as a mental health disorder. It does not include references to dysphoria or
dysfunction.
Gender dysphoria is the term used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR) (American Psychiatric Association,
2022). In the DSM-5-TR definition gender incongruence has to be associated with
clinically significant distress or impairment of function. Younger children with gender
incongruence may not experience dysphoria, but it commonly arises or increases as
they enter puberty.
Gender dysphoria is the more commonly used term in research publications, as well
as clinical settings. It is also most likely to be familiar to the lay public since it has been
used widely in mainstream and social media. Like depression, it is a label that is used
colloquially to describe feelings, as well as being a formal diagnosis.

18

Language

Within the report, we use the term gender incongruence as defined above, and genderrelated distress to describe the feelings that commonly arise or intensify during puberty
and lead to a young person seeking help from the NHS.
The term child is used to refer to pre-pubertal children and young people to refer to under
18s who have entered puberty. The report also refers to adolescents when discussing
the stages of brain development, and both adolescents and youth where the study being
described uses these terms. Young adults refers to those between the ages of 18 and 30.
During the lifetime of the Review, the term trans has moved from being a quite narrow
definition to being applied as an umbrella term to a broader spectrum of gender diversity.
This report uses ‘transgender’ to describe binary transgender individuals and ‘non-binary’
for those who do not have a traditional gender binary of male or female. The term ‘gender
non-conforming’ is used to describe those individuals who do not choose to conform to
traditional gender norms and ‘gender-questioning’ as a broader term that might describe
children and young people who are in a process of understanding their gender identity.
The term ‘trans’ is used as the umbrella term.
The terms patient and service user are also used throughout the report. Although these
have been used interchangeably, we have used service user when someone has used the
service but may no longer be a patient under the service.
This report also includes citations from many other sources. It is important to note that
these citations may use language and terminology that the Review would not choose.
As a general rule, the report retains the language of the referenced papers. Any
adaptation of a citation to provide clarity is represented.
The Review was commissioned by and is for the NHS in England, however throughout
the report we use the terms NHSE, NHS and UK. This is usually to align with the papers
and research being discussed.

19

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Summary and
recommendations
1. The aim of this Review is to make
recommendations that ensure that children
and young people who are questioning
their gender identity or experiencing gender
dysphoria receive a high standard of care.
Care that meets their needs, is safe, holistic
and effective. At its heart are vulnerable
children and young people and an NHS
service unable to cope with the demand.
2. Yet from the start, the Review stepped
into an arena where there were strong and
widely divergent opinions unsupported by
adequate evidence. The surrounding noise and
increasingly toxic, ideological and polarised
public debate has made the work of the Review
significantly harder and does nothing to serve
the children and young people who may already
be subject to significant minority stress.
3. Within this context the Review set out to
understand the reasons for the growth in
referrals and the changing epidemiology, and to
identify the clinical approach and service model
that would best serve this population.
4. There are conflicting views about the
clinical approach, with expectation at times
being far from usual clinical practice. This has
made some clinicians fearful of working with
gender-questioning young people, despite their
presentation being similar to many children and
young people presenting to other NHS services.
5. Although some think the clinical approach
should be based on a social justice model, the
NHS works in an evidence-based way.

20

Whilst navigating a way through the surrounding
‘culture war’, the Review has been acutely and
increasingly aware of the need for evidence
to support its thinking and ultimately the final
recommendations made in this report.
6. When the Review started, the evidence
base, particularly in relation to the use of
puberty blockers and masculinising/feminising
hormones, had already been shown to be weak.
There was, and remains, a lot of misinformation
easily accessible online, with opposing sides
of the debate pointing to research to justify a
position, regardless of the quality of the studies.
7. To understand the best way to support
children and young people, the Review’s
ambition was therefore not only to understand
the existing evidence, but also to improve the
evidence base so that young people, their
families and carers, and the clinicians working
with them have the best information upon
which to form their decisions.
8. To scrutinise the existing evidence
the Review commissioned a robust and
independent evidence review and research
programme from the University of York to inform
its recommendations and remained cautious in
its advice whilst awaiting the findings.
9. The University of York’s programme of
work has shown that there continues to be a
lack of high-quality evidence in this area and
disappointingly, as will become clear in this
report, attempts to improve the evidence base
have been thwarted by a lack of cooperation
from the adult gender services.
10. The Review has therefore had to base its
recommendations on the currently available
evidence, supplemented by its own extensive
programme of engagement.

Summary and recommendations

11. Hearing directly from people with lived
13. At the end of this Review, while there is
experience and clinicians has provided valuable still uncertainty, the following remains true:
insight into the ways in which services are
• There are children and young people,
currently delivered and experienced. This has
families and carers all trying to make sense
contributed to the Review’s understanding of
of their individual situations, often dealing
the positive experiences of living as a trans or
with considerable challenges and upheaval.
gender diverse person, as well the uncertainties,
• The length of the waiting list to access
complexities and challenges faced by children,
gender services has significant implications
young people, their families and carers, and
for this population and NHS service
those working in and around services trying to
delivery.
support them.
12. This report is organised into five parts:
• Part 1 - Approach describes the Review’s
approach to the work undertaken.
• Part 2 - Context explores the history of
services for children and young people with
gender dysphoria, highlighting the changing
demographic and the rise in referral rate.
• Part 3 - Understanding the patient cohort
sets out what we have learnt about the
characteristics of children and young people
who are seeking NHS support for gender
incongruence and considers what may be
driving the rise in referrals and the change
in the case-mix.
• Part 4 - Clinical approach and clinical
management looks at what we need
to do to help children and young people
to thrive: the purpose, expected benefits
and outcomes of clinical interventions in
the pathway, including the use of hormones
and how to support complex presentations.
• Part 5 - Service model considers the
gender service delivery model, workforce
requirements, pathways of care into this
specialist service, further development
of the evidence base and how to embed
continuous clinical improvement and
research.

• Generalisations about children and young
people questioning their gender identity
or experiencing gender dysphoria are
unhelpful. People are individuals.
• Young people’s sense of identity is not
always fixed and may evolve over time.
There should be no hierarchy of gender
identity or how this is expressed, be that
socially or medically. Nobody should feel
the need to invalidate their own experience
for fear it reflects badly on other identities
and choices.
• Whilst some young people may feel an
urgency to transition, young adults looking
back at their younger selves would often
advise slowing down.
• For some, the best outcome will be transition,
whereas others may resolve their distress
in other ways. Some may transition and
then de/retransition and/or experience
regret. The NHS needs to care for all those
seeking support.
• The care of this population needs to be
holistic and personal. It may comprise a
wide range of interventions and services,
some of which can be delivered outside
NHS specialist services.

21

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

• There remains diversity of opinion as to
how best to treat these children and young
people. The evidence is weak and clinicians
have told us they are unable to determine
with any certainty which children and young
people will go on to have an enduring
trans identity.

14. Whatever your views on gender identity,
there is no denying there are increasing
numbers of children and young people seeking
support from the NHS for gender-related
distress. They should receive the same quality
of care as other children and young people
experiencing distress.

• Many primary and secondary care clinicians
have concerns about their capacity and
competence to work with this population
and some are fearful of doing so given the
surrounding social debate.

15. A compassionate and kind society
remembers that there are real children, young
people, families, carers and clinicians behind
the headlines. The Review believes that each
individual child and young person seeking help
from the NHS should receive the support they
need to thrive.

• Our current understanding of the long-term
health impacts of hormone interventions is
limited and needs to be better understood.
• Young people become particularly vulnerable
at the point of transfer to adult services.

22

Summary and recommendations

Key points and recommendations
16. In considering the key questions outlined in
the terms of reference, this Report can only set
out what is known and unknown and think about
how the NHS can respond safely, effectively
and compassionately, leaving some issues

for wider societal debate. However, in order to
gain as broad an understanding as possible the
Review drew on several sources of information
(see Figure 1), underpinned by basic scientific
and clinical principles.

What
has 1:
informed
review?
Figure
What has the
informed
the Review?

Evidence

Professional Input

• Series of systematic reviews
• Qualitative research

• Listening sessions with clinicans &
other professionals

• Quantitative research

• Focus groups with GIDS staff

• GIDS discharge summary audit

• Programme of thematic roundtables
• Professional panel & online survey
• Clinical Expert Group
• Workshops & discussions with frontline
staff, professional bodies, national
organisations & system leaders

Lived Experience
• Weekly listening sessions with
individual service users & parents
• Focus groups with young people
& young adults

International Sources

• Regular meetings with support &
advocacy groups

• Guideline appraisal

• Existing documented insights into
lived experience
• Personal narratives

• International survey
• Meetings with international
clinicians & policy makers

23

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

17. The numbers of children and young people
presenting to the UK NHS Gender Identity

Service (GIDS) has been increasing year on
year since 2009, with an exponential rise in 2014.

Figure 2: Sex ratio in children and adolescents referred to GIDS in the UK (2009-16)
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Adolescents F

15

48*

78*

141*

221*

314*

689*

1071*

Adolescents M

24

44*

41

77*

120*

185*

293*

426*

Children F

2

7

12

17

22

36

77*

138*

Children M

10

19

29

30

31

55*

103*

131

AFAB = Assigned female at birth
AMAB = Assigned male at birth

* Indicates p< .05 which shows a signiﬁcant increase of referrals compared to previous year

Source: Figure adapted from de Graaf, N. M., Giovanardi, G., Zitz, C., & Carmichael, P. (2018). Sex ratio in children
and adolescents referred to the Gender Identity Development Service in the UK (2009-2016). Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 47(5), 1301-1304. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-018-1204-9, with permission from Springer Nature.

24

Summary and recommendations

18. Prior to 2009, GIDS did not attract
significant attention. At that time, the service
saw fewer than 50 children per year, with even
fewer receiving medical treatment. However,
unprecedented demand and a change in the
demographic of young people accessing gender
services has generated a series of unresolved
issues, a long waiting list and an unsustainable
service model, one that was not set up to
manage the new population.
19. The Review has focused on future provision
and has not scrutinised previous provision, but
it is necessary to look back to fully appreciate
the context leading to the current circumstances
and to learn lessons relating to previous and
current clinical management and understand
why change is needed.
20. GIDS was established in 1989. At that time,
the service saw fewer than 10 children a year,
predominantly pre-pubertal birth-registered
males, and the main focus was therapeutic,
with only a small proportion referred for hormone
treatment by around age 16.
21. The approach to treatment changed with
the emergence of ‘the Dutch Protocol’ which
involved the use of puberty blockers from early
puberty. In 2011, the UK trialled the use of
puberty blockers in the ‘early intervention study.’
22. Preliminary results from the early
intervention study in 2015-2016 did not
demonstrate benefit. The results of the study
were not formally published until 2020, at which
time it showed there was a lack of any positive
measurable outcomes. Despite this, from 2014
puberty blockers moved from a research-only
protocol to being available in routine clinical
practice and were given to a broader group of
patients who would not have met the inclusion
criteria of the original protocol.

23. The adoption of a treatment with uncertain
benefits without further scrutiny is a significant
departure from established practice. This, in
combination with the long delay in publication
of the results of the study, has had significant
consequences in terms of patient expectations
of intended benefits and demand for treatment.
24. A planned update of the service
specification by NHS England in 2019,
examined the published evidence on medical
interventions in this area and found it to be
weak. In the absence of a clear evidence base
on how best to support the growing numbers of
gender-questioning children and young people
seeking help from the NHS this Independent
Review was commissioned by NHS England in
autumn 2020.

Interim report
25. In 2022, the Review published an interim
report, which provided some initial advice. It set
out the importance of evidence-based service
development and highlighted major gaps and
weaknesses in the research base underpinning
the clinical management of children and young
people with gender incongruence and gender
dysphoria, including the appropriate approaches
to assessment and treatment. Critically, the
interim report highlighted that little is known
about the medium- and longer-term outcomes
for children and young people receiving NHS
support and/or treatment.
26. This lack of evidence placed limitations on
the advice that could be given by the Review.
An independent research programme was
commissioned with the aim of providing the
Review with the best available collation of
published evidence, as well as qualitative and
quantitative research to fill knowledge gaps.

25

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

27. The research programme, led by the
University of York, comprised appraisal of
the published evidence and guidelines, an
international survey and quantitative and
qualitative research. A Clinical Expert Group
(CEG) was established by the Review to help
interpret the findings.

32. Understanding who is accessing services
informs an appropriate clinical approach.
Therefore, to gain a complete understanding,
the Review examined what is known about the
nature and causes of gender incongruence and
dysphoria. This goes to the heart of some of the
core controversies in this area.

28. This final report provides full details of
the research approach and methodology
used by the research team and a synthesis of
the findings alongside interpretation of what
they mean for the Review. The peer reviewed
systematic reviews have been published
alongside this report.

33. A failure to consider or debate the
underlying reasons for the change in the patient
population has led to people taking different
positions about how to respond to the children
and young people at the centre of the debate,
without reasoned discussion about what has led
to their gender experience and distress.

29. In addition to formal research, an extensive
programme of engagement has informed the
Review. A mixed-methods approach was taken
that prioritised input from people with relevant
lived experience and organisations working with
LGBTQ+ youth or children and young people
generally, and clinicians and other professionals
with responsibility for providing care and support
to children and young people within specialist
gender services and beyond.

34. There is broad agreement that gender
incongruence, like many other human
characteristics, arises from a combination of
biological, psychological, social and cultural
factors.

Understanding
the patient cohort
30. The Review explored the reasons for the
increase in referrals and why this increase has
disproportionately been seen in birth registered
females presenting in adolescence, and the
implications of this for the service.
31. This is a different cohort from that looked
at by earlier studies. Among referrals there is
a greater complexity of presentation with high
levels of neurodiversity and/or co-occurring
mental health issues and a higher prevalence
than in the general population of adverse
childhood experiences and looked after children.
The increase in referrals and change in casemix is also being seen internationally.

26

35. A common explanation put forward is that
the increase in presentation is because of
greater acceptance. While it certainly seems
to be the case that there is much greater
acceptance of trans identities, particularly
among younger generations, which may
account for some of the increase in numbers,
the exponential change in referrals over a
particularly short five-year timeframe is very
much faster than would be expected for normal
evolution of acceptance of a minority group.
This also does not adequately explain the switch
from birth-registered males to birth-registered
females, which is unlike trans presentations in
any prior historical period.
36. There are different issues involved in
considering gender care for children and young
people than for adults. Children and young
people are on a developmental trajectory that
continues to their mid-20s and this needs
to be considered when thinking about the

Summary and recommendations

determinants of gender incongruence. An
understanding of brain development and the
usual tasks of adolescence is essential in
understanding how development of gender
identity relates to the other aspects of
adolescent development.

situation. Being gender-questioning or having a
trans identity means different things to different
people. Among those being referred to children
and young people’s gender services, some may
benefit from medical intervention and some may
not. The clinical approach must reflect this.

37. This group of young people should also
be considered in the context of a wider group
of adolescents with complex presentations
seeking help from the NHS. There has been
a substantial increase in rates of mental health
problems in children and adolescents across the
UK over the past decade, with increased anxiety
and depression being most evident in teenage
girls and a rise in young people presenting
with other bodily manifestations of distress;
for example, eating disorders, tics and body
dysmorphic disorder.

42. Working through this multi-layered
developmental process takes time, and the role
of the clinical team is to help the young person
address some of these issues so that they can
better understand their gender identity and
evaluate the options available to them.

38. Research suggests gender expression
is likely determined by a variable mix of
factors such as biological predisposition,
early childhood experiences, sexuality and
expectations of puberty. For some mental health
difficulties are hard to disentangle. The impact
of a variety of contemporary societal influences
and stressors (including online experience)
remains unclear. Peer influence is also very
powerful during adolescence as are different
generational perspectives.
39. Pragmatically the above explanations for the
observed changes in the population are all likely
to be true to a greater or lesser extent, but for any
individual a different mix of factors will apply.
40. This is a heterogenous group, with broad
ranging presentations often including complex
needs that extend beyond gender-related
distress and this needs to be reflected in the
services offered to them by the NHS.
41. Too often this cohort are considered a
homogenous group for whom there is a single
driving cause and an optimum treatment
approach, but this is an over-simplification of the

Clinical approach
and management
43. Clinicians have a range of viewpoints on
the care and treatment of gender-questioning
children and young people, with many left
confused as to what the best approach might
be. There are mixed views on what young
people want and need; for example, young
people have told us they need space and
time to explore, but also that questioning feels
intrusive. Some parents feel less questioning is
needed, whilst others think the process is not
thorough enough.
44. The Review sought to better understand the
different clinical approaches and management,
including through a standardised procedure
for appraising international clinical guidelines
(carried out by the research team at the
University of York).
45. The findings raise questions about the
quality of currently available guidelines. Most
guidelines have not followed the international
standards for guideline development, and
because of this the research team could only
recommend two guidelines for practice - the
Finnish guideline published in 2020 and the
Swedish guideline published in 2022.

27

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

46. However, even these guidelines lack clear
recommendations regarding certain aspects of
practice and would be of benefit if they provided
more detailed guidance on how to implement
recommendations.
47. The World Professional Association of
Transgender Healthcare (WPATH) has been
highly influential in directing international
practice, although its guidelines were found
by the University of York appraisal process
to lack developmental rigour.
48. Early versions of two international
guidelines - the Endocrine Society 2009 and
WPATH 7 - influenced nearly all the other
guidelines, except for the recent Nordic
guidelines.

52. In response to these findings, the Review
asked its CEG to develop a consensus on the
purpose of and approach to assessment.
53. Cognisant of the inconsistency in the
published research and the complexity of
presentations, the CEG worked to develop
a holistic needs assessment framework. Its
purpose is to derive a multi-level formulation
leading to an individual care plan that supports
the development of the child/young person’s
broader wellbeing and functioning. This is
consistent with approaches for adolescents
with other complex multi-faceted presentations.

54. When conducting an assessment, it will
be important that clinicians are mindful that
presentations, pathways and outcomes for this
cohort are very individual, and the focus needs
49. Given the lack of evidence-based
to be on helping each person to find the best
guidelines, it is imperative that staff working
pathway for them. Assessments should be
within NHS gender services are cognisant of the
respectful of the individual’s experience and be
limitations in relation to the evidence base and
developmentally informed.
fully understand the knowns and the unknowns.

Assessment
50. The interim report advised that a
developmentally informed assessment
framework is needed to guard against
inconsistencies and gaps in the assessment
process, with clear responsibility and guidance
for the different components of the process at
primary, secondary and tertiary level.
51. Despite the agreement within the
international guidelines on the need for a
multi-disciplinary team, and some commonalities
between them in the areas explored during the
assessment process, the most striking problem is
the lack of any consensus on the purpose of the
assessment process.

28

Recommendation 1:
Given the complexity of this
population, these services must
operate to the same standards
as other services seeing children
and young people with complex
presentations and/or additional
risk factors. There should be a
nominated medical practitioner
(paediatrician/child psychiatrist) who
takes overall clinical responsibility
for patient safety within the service.

Summary and recommendations

Recommendation 2:
Clinicians should apply the
assessment framework developed
by the Review’s Clinical Expert
Group, to ensure children/
young people referred to NHS
gender services receive a holistic
assessment of their needs to
inform an individualised care plan.
This should include screening for
neurodevelopmental conditions,
including autism spectrum disorder,
and a mental health assessment.
The framework should be kept
under review and evolve to reflect
emerging evidence.

Diagnosis
55. The Review has heard mixed views
about how young people perceive the value
of a diagnosis of gender dysphoria. Many
young people do not see themselves as
having a medical condition and some may
feel it undermines their autonomy and right
to self-determination. Others see diagnosis
as validating, and important when looking to
access hormone treatment.
56. Some service users and advocates view
an extensive exploration of other conditions
and diagnoses as an attempt to find ‘any other
reason’ for the person’s distress other than them
being trans.

57. There are several reasons why listing all
relevant formal diagnoses is important for this
group of children and young people:
• To provide the best evidence-based care,
it is important that the clinician considers
all possible (sometimes multiple) diagnoses
that may be hindering the young person’s
wellbeing and ability to thrive.
• The clinician carries responsibility for
the assessment, subsequent treatment
recommendations and any harm that
might be caused to a patient under their
care. They need to define as clearly
and reproducibly as they can exactly
what condition they are treating to be
accountable for their decisions on the
options offered to the patient. If they are
offering potentially irreversible medical
treatments to a patient, it is important to
specify whether the patient meets formal
diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria or
any other conditions.
• Finally, the Review’s commissioned
systematic review demonstrated that
other diagnoses within the group were not
consistently documented, and in order to
better understand and support these young
people it is essential that all diagnoses are
systematically recorded for clinical and
research purposes.
58. Although a diagnosis of gender dysphoria
has been seen as necessary for initiating
medical treatment, it is not reliably predictive
of whether that young person will have
longstanding gender incongruence in the future,
or whether medical intervention will be the best
option for them.

29

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Understanding how the gender-related distress
has evolved in a particular individual, what other
factors may be contributing, and the individual’s
needs and preferences for treatment are equally
important.
59. It is also important to ensure that there is
a focus on functioning, general well-being and
resilience, to ensure the child/young person is
able to make considered decisions about their
future pathway.

Individualised care plan
60. Historically, the model of care for children
and young people presenting with gender
incongruence or distress was entirely based on
a psychosocial model, with medical interventions
being introduced more recently. Most clinical
teams would still see psychosocial interventions
as the starting point in a care pathway.
61. The controversy surrounding the use of
medical treatments has taken focus away from
what an individual’s care and treatment plan is
intended to achieve, both for individual children
and young people and for the overall population.
62. The Review has kept at its heart the concern
that clinicians are dealing with a group of children
and young people who frequently, albeit not
always, will be in a state of considerable
distress by the time they present to the NHS,
and will often have multiple unmet needs.
63. There should be a tiered approach to any
intervention package which:
• addresses urgent risk;
• reduces distress and associated mental
health issues and psychosocial stressors,
so that the young person is able to function
and make complex decisions;
• co-develops a plan for addressing the
gender issues, which may involve any
combination of social, psychological and
physical interventions.
30

64. There should be a distinction for the
approach taken to pre- and post-pubertal
children when considering the most appropriate
interventions. This is of particular importance
in relation to social transition, which may not
be thought of as an intervention or treatment
because it is something that generally happens
at home, online or in school and not within
health services..
65. The central aim is to help young people
to thrive and achieve their life goals. The
immediate goal of the care and treatment plan
must be to address distress, if this is part of
the child/young person’s presentation, and
any barriers to participation in everyday life
(for example, school community or social
activities).
66. For the majority of young people, a medical
pathway may not be the best way to achieve
this. For those young people for whom a
medical pathway is clinically indicated, it is not
enough to provide this without also addressing
wider mental health and/or psychosocially
challenging problems such as family breakdown,
barriers to participation in school life or social
activities, bullying and minority stress.

Psychological interventions
67. The systematic review of psychosocial
interventions found that the low quality of the
studies, the poor reporting of the intervention
details, and the wide variation in the types of
interventions investigated, meant it was not
possible to determine how effective different
interventions were for children and young
people experiencing gender distress.
68. Despite this, we know that many
psychological therapies have a good evidence
base for the treatment in the general population
of conditions that are common in this group,
such as depression and anxiety.

Summary and recommendations

This is why it is so important to understand
the full range of needs and ensure that these
young people have access to the same helpful
evidence-based interventions as others.
69. In addition to treating co-existing
conditions, the focus on the use of puberty
blockers for managing gender-related distress
has overshadowed the possibility that other
evidence-based treatments may be more
effective. The intent of psychosocial intervention
is not to change the person’s perception of who
they are, but to work with them to explore their
concerns and experiences and help alleviate
their distress regardless of whether or not the
young person subsequently proceeds on a
medical pathway.
70. The role of therapeutic approaches needs
to be understood and data and information must
be collected on the applicability of approaches
for gender-related distress and any co-occurring
conditions. This will start to bring understanding
the efficacy of treatments in line with those
routinely used for other children and young
people in distress

Recommendation 3:
Standard evidence
based psychological and
psychopharmacological treatment
approaches should be used to
support the management of the
associated distress and cooccurring
conditions. This should include
support for parents/carers and
siblings as appropriate.

Social transition
71. There is no single definition of social
transition, but it is broadly understood to refer to
social changes to live as a different gender such
as altering hair or clothing, name change, and/or
use of different pronouns.
72. There is a spectrum from young people who
make relatively limited gender non-conforming
changes in appearance to those who may have
fully socially transitioned from an early age and
may be living in stealth.
73. One key difference between children and
adolescents is that parental attitudes and
beliefs will have an impact on whether the child
socially transitions. For adolescents, exploration
is a normal process, and rigid binary gender
stereotypes can be unhelpful.
74. There are different views on the benefits
versus the harms of early social transition.
Some consider that it may improve mental
health for children experiencing gender-related
distress, while others consider that it makes
it more likely that a child’s gender dysphoria,
which might have resolved at puberty, has an
altered trajectory potentially, culminating in
life-long medical intervention.
75. In the UK and internationally, it is now the
norm for many children and young people to
present to gender clinics having undergone full
or partial social transition.
76. The systematic review showed no clear
evidence that social transition in childhood
has any positive or negative mental health
outcomes, and relatively weak evidence for any
effect in adolescence. However, those who had
socially transitioned at an earlier age and/or
prior to being seen in clinic were more likely to
proceed to a medical pathway.

31

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

77. Although it is not possible to know from
these studies whether earlier social transition
was causative in this outcome, lessons from
studies of children with differences in sexual
development (DSD) show that a complex
interplay between prenatal androgen levels,
external genitalia, sex of rearing and sociocultural environment all play a part in eventual
gender identity.
78. Therefore, sex of rearing seems to have
some influence on eventual gender outcome,
and it is possible that social transition in
childhood may change the trajectory of gender
identity development for children with early
gender incongruence.
79. The clinician should help families to
recognise normal developmental variation in
gender role behaviour and expression. Avoiding
premature decisions and considering partial
rather than full transitioning can be a way of
ensuring flexibility and keeping options open
until the developmental trajectory becomes
clearer.

Recommendation 4:
When families/carers are making
decisions about social transition
of pre-pubertal children, services
should ensure that they can be
seen as early as possible by a
clinical professional with relevant
experience.

32

Medical pathways
80. The original rationale for use of puberty
blockers was that this would buy ‘time to think’
by delaying onset of puberty and also improve
the ability to ‘pass’ in later life. Subsequently it
was suggested that they may also improve body
image and psychological wellbeing.
81. The systematic review undertaken by
the University of York found multiple studies
demonstrating that puberty blockers exert their
intended effect in suppressing puberty, and
also that bone density is compromised during
puberty suppression.
82. However, no changes in gender dysphoria
or body satisfaction were demonstrated. There
was insufficient/inconsistent evidence about the
effects of puberty suppression on psychological
or psychosocial wellbeing, cognitive development,
cardio-metabolic risk or fertility.
83. Moreover, given that the vast majority of
young people started on puberty blockers
proceed from puberty blockers to masculinising/
feminising hormones, there is no evidence that
puberty blockers buy time to think, and some
concern that they may change the trajectory of
psychosexual and gender identity development.
84. The Review’s letter to NHS England (July
2023) advised that because puberty blockers
only have clearly defined benefits in quite
narrow circumstances, and because of the
potential risks to neurocognitive development,
psychosexual development and longer-term
bone health, they should only be offered under
a research protocol. This has been taken
forward by NHS England and National Institute
for Health and Care Research (NIHR).

Summary and recommendations

85. The University of York also carried out a
systematic review of outcomes of masculinising/
feminising hormones. Overall, the authors
concluded that “There is a lack of high-quality
research assessing the outcomes of hormone
interventions in adolescents with gender
dysphoria/incongruence, and few studies that
undertake long-term follow-up. No conclusions
can be drawn about the effect on gender
dysphoria, body satisfaction, psychosocial
health, cognitive development, or fertility.
Uncertainty remains about the outcomes for
height/growth, cardiometabolic and bone health.
There is suggestive evidence from mainly
pre-post studies that hormone treatment may
improve psychological health, although robust
research with long-term follow-up is needed”.
86. It has been suggested that hormone
treatment reduces the elevated risk of death
by suicide in this population, but the evidence
found did not support this conclusion.
87. The percentage of people treated with
hormones who subsequently detransition
remains unknown due to the lack of long-term
follow-up studies, although there is suggestion
that numbers are increasing.
88. A problem, that has become increasingly
apparent as the Review has progressed is
that research on psychosocial interventions
and longer-term outcomes for those who do
not access endocrine pathways is as weak as
research on endocrine treatment. This leaves
a major gap in our knowledge about how best
to support and help the growing population of
young people with gender-related distress in the
context of complex presentations.

Long-term outcomes
89. One of the major difficulties with planning
and evaluating gender identity services for
children and young people is the very limited
evidence on the longer-term outcomes for
people who have accessed GIDS.
90. When clinicians talk to patients about what
interventions may be best for them, they usually
refer to the longer-term benefits and risks of
different options, based on outcome data from
other people who have been through a similar
care pathway. This information is not currently
available for interventions in children and young
people with gender incongruence or gender
dysphoria, so young people and their families
have to make decisions without an adequate
picture of the potential impacts and outcomes.
91. A strand of research commissioned by the
Review was a quantitative data linkage study.
The aim of this study was to fill some of the
gaps in follow-up data for the approximately
9,000 young people who have been through
GIDS. This would help to develop a stronger
evidence base about the types of support
and interventions received and longer-term
outcomes. This required cooperation of GIDS
and the NHS adult gender services.
92. In January 2024, the Review received a
letter from NHS England stating that, despite
efforts to encourage the participation of the
NHS gender clinics, the necessary cooperation
had not been forthcoming.

33

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

93. This quantitative study represents a unique
opportunity to provide further evidence to assist
young people, their parents/carers, and the
clinicians working with them to make informed
decisions about the right pathway for them.
94. Although retrospective research is never
as robust as prospective research, it would
take a minimum of 10-15 years to extract the
necessary follow-up data
95. NHS England has stated a commitment to
realising the ambitions of the data linkage study
beyond the life of the Review and the Review
has detailed the University of York’s experience
in trying to move the study forward.

Recommendation 5:
NHS England, working with DHSC
should direct the gender clinics to
participate in the data linkage study
within the lifetime of the current
statutory instrument. NHS England’s
Research Oversight Board should
take responsibility for interpreting
the findings of the research.

Challenges in clinical
decision making
96. One of the main areas of contention in the
provision of gender services for children and
young people is the use of hormone treatments
for gender dysphoria. In developing its vision for
the new service, the Review has considered the
issue of consent, the challenges of which were
starkly brought to light by the Bell vs Tavistock
case.

34

97. The Judicial Review’s responsibilities could
not be extended beyond the issue of capacity
and competence to consent. However, consent
is more than just capacity and competence. It
requires clinicians to ensure that the proposed
intervention is clinically indicated as they
have a duty to offer appropriate treatment. It
also requires the patient to be provided with
appropriate and sufficient information about the
risks, benefits and expected outcomes of the
treatment.
98. Assessing whether a hormone pathway
is indicated is challenging. A formal diagnosis
of gender dysphoria is frequently cited as a
prerequisite for accessing hormone treatment.
However, it is not reliably predictive of whether
that young person will have longstanding gender
incongruence in the future, or whether medical
intervention will be the best option for them.
99. In addition, the poor evidence base makes
it difficult to provide adequate information on
which a young person and their family can make
an informed choice.
100. A trusted source of information is needed
on all aspects of medical care, but in particular it
is important to defuse/manage expectations that
have been built up by claims about the efficacy
of puberty blockers.
101. Although young people often express a
sense of urgency in their wish to access medical
treatments, based on personal experience some
young adults have suggested that taking time
to explore options is preferable. The option to
provide masculinising/feminising hormones
from the age of 16 is available, but the Review
would recommend an extremely cautious
clinical approach and a strong clinical rationale
for providing hormones before the age of 18.
This would keep options open during this
important developmental window, allowing time
for management of any co-occurring conditions,
building of resilience, and fertility preservation,
if required.

Summary and recommendations

102. The overarching conclusion from the
evidence presented in this Review is that the
puberty blocker research protocol, which is
already in development, needs to be one part of
a much broader research programme that seeks
to build the evidence on all potential interventions
and determine the most effective way of
supporting these children and young people.

Recommendation 7:
Long-standing gender incongruence
should be an essential pre-requisite
for medical treatment but is only
one aspect of deciding whether a
medical pathway is the right option
for an individual.

Recommendation 6:
The evidence base underpinning
medical and non-medical
interventions in this clinical area
must be improved. Following our
earlier recommendation to establish
a puberty blocker trial, which
has been taken forward by NHS
England, we further recommend
a full programme of research be
established. This should look at the
characteristics, interventions and
outcomes of every young person
presenting to the NHS gender
services.
• The puberty blocker trial should
be part of a programme of
research which also evaluates
outcomes of psychosocial
interventions and masculinising/
feminising hormones.
• Consent should routinely be
sought for all children and
young people for enrolment in
a research study with follow-up
into adulthood.

Recommendation 8:
NHS England should review the
policy on masculinising/feminising
hormones. The option to provide
masculinising/feminising hormones
from age 16 is available, but the
Review would recommend extreme
caution. There should be a clear
clinical rationale for providing
hormones at this stage rather than
waiting until an individual reaches 18.

Recommendation 9:
Every case considered for medical
treatment should be discussed at
a national Multi Disciplinary Team
(MDT) hosted by the National
Provider Collaborative replacing the
Multi Professional Review Group
(MPRG).

Recommendation 10:
All children should be offered fertility
counselling and preservation prior to
going onto a medical pathway.

35

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

108. Establishment of a National Provider
Collaborative should ensure the regional
103. Since receiving the Review’s interim
centres operate to shared standards and
report, NHS England has taken steps to
operating procedures, developing protocols for
increase capacity, establishing two new services assessment and treatment. The Collaborative
led by specialist children’s hospitals. This is the
should have a role in overseeing ethics, training
first step in commissioning a network of regional and professional development, data and audit,
services across the country.
quality improvement and research requirements,
as well as providing a forum for the discussion
104. The Review had hoped to take learning
of complex cases. The aim is that no matter
from these interim services. Instead, it has gained
where in the country the child/young person
insight from the considerable challenges faced
is seen, they will receive the same high
in their establishment within a highly emotive
standards of evidence-based care.
and politicised arena. This, coupled with concerns
about the weakness of the evidence base and
109. In addition to the single overarching
lack of professional guidance, has impacted
National Provider Network, each Regional
on the ability of the new services to recruit the
Centre should work with local services within
appropriate multi-disciplinary workforce.
their region as a formalised Operational Delivery
Network (ODN). These formalised networks
105. The Review welcomes the first steps NHS
and increased number of providers should allow
England has taken to establish a regional model
care and risk to be actively managed at different
of care, but maintains that a distributed model
levels according to need, reducing waiting times
of care is needed to meet current demand and
for specialist care.
provide a more appropriate holistic, localised
and timely approach to caring for children and
110. This model will also support integration
young people needing support.
between different children’s services and
facilitate early access to local services along
106. Services should not be located solely in
flexible pathways that better respond to
tertiary centres and a much broader based
individual needs. Overall, this model should
service model is needed with a flexible
improve the experience of care for children and
workforce working across a regional footprint
young people questioning their gender identity.
in partnership with local services. Models of
care that deliver a clinical service over multiple
111. The new regional services should establish
sites have a potential to maintain geographical
the National Provider Collaborative without
access to services whilst improving quality of
delay and quickly develop their networks, utilising
care and optimising the use of the workforce.
existing local relationships in the first instance to
accelerate service provision. This approach would
107. Clinical Network and Multi-Site models
act as a stepping stone to ultimately skilling up all
provide better continuity of care, closer to home,
secondary level services to provide assessment
and the ability for children and young people
and psychological support for these children and
to move more easily between components of
young people, with medical intervention remaining
the service at their own pace. They also allow
at tertiary level.
the workforce to be shared across the network
without destabilising local services and address
some of the recruitment challenges experienced
by both GIDS and the new providers.

Service model

36

Summary and recommendations

Recommendation 11:
NHS England and service providers
should work to develop the regional
multi-site service networks as soon
as possible. This could be based on
a lead provider model, where NHS
England delegates commissioning
responsibility to the regional services
to subcontract locally to providers in
their region.

Recommendation 12:
The National Provider Collaborative
should be established without delay.

114. Given the increasing numbers of gender
diverse and gender-questioning young people,
it is important that all clinical staff can support
them in a range of settings across the NHS. It
is equally important that professionals who are
involved in their ongoing care have broad-based
skills in adolescent physical and mental health
so that young people are treated holistically
and not solely on the basis of their gender
presentation.
115. In line with international practice, the
Regional Centres will need a broad multiprofessional workforce. The skills of those
working within the service need to reflect the
broad and varied needs of this heterogenous
group and the service needs to include the
appropriate skill mix to support both individuals
for whom medical intervention is clinically
indicated and those for whom it is not.

116. This workforce should include psychiatrists,
paediatricians, psychologists, psychotherapists,
clinical nurse specialists, social workers,
specialists in autism and other neurodiverse
112. The Review recognises that workforce
presentations, speech and language therapists,
shortfalls are one of the most challenging
occupational health specialists and, for the
aspects of delivering this service.
subgroup for whom medical treatment may be
considered appropriate, endocrinologists and
113. Within the existing model of care, the vast
fertility specialists. Social care should also
majority of gender-questioning children and
young people who seek help from the NHS have be embedded and there should be expertise
in safeguarding and support for looked-after
been referred to a highly specialised workforce
working solely in gender care. A smaller number children and children who have experienced
trauma.
are successfully supported in local Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) or 117. When outlining the future service model,
paediatric services. This approach has had the
to increase the available workforce without
unintended consequence of deskilling the rest
depleting other service areas, the Review has
of the workforce and generating unmanageably described a flexible, multi-site staff group working
long waiting lists.
under joint contracts that support flexibility.

Workforce

120. Staff should maintain a broad clinical
perspective by working across related non-gender
services within the tertiary centre and between
tertiary and secondary centres in order to

37

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

embed the care of children and young people
with gender-related distress within a broader
child and adolescent health context. This has
the additional benefits of not destabilising
existing services, supporting continuity and
connection and democratising knowledge.
118. This is a highly challenging, complex and
emotive area in which to work. Those working
with this group should have professional
supervision and support to provide a place for
exploration of their own approach and the range
of emotions they may feel. There should be
formal processes for raising concerns that sit
outside immediate supervision. This should also
support consistency in approach and improve
retention of the workforce.
119. The National Provider Collaborative
should also explore running structured forums
where all staff, clinical and non-clinical, come
together regularly to discuss the emotional and
social aspects of working within the service supporting staff by giving them a safe place
to raise issues.

Recommendation 13:
To increase the available workforce
and maintain a broader clinical lens,
joint contracts should be utilised
to support staff to work across the
network and across different services.

Recommendation 14:
NHS England, through its Workforce
Training and Education function,
must ensure requirements for this
service area are built into overall
workforce planning for adolescent
services.
38

Training and education
120. There is a lack of confidence among
the wider workforce to engage with genderquestioning children and adolescents. Many
clinicians working with children and young
people have transferable skills and expertise,
but there is a need for all clinicians across the
NHS to receive better training on how to work
sensitively and effectively with trans, non-binary
and gender-questioning young people.
121. Clinicians working with children and young
people and families/carers will need to have
the skills to competently engage families/carers
from a broad range of backgrounds, and be
aware and informed of the range of priorities
that young people and their parents/carers can
present to services.
122. Young people told the Review that they
want clinicians to listen to them, respect how
they feel and support them to work through
their feelings and options. They expect clinicians
to display compassion, understanding and
validation, and to treat them as an individual.
123. Training programmes should follow
practice in other service areas (for example,
safeguarding), where the level of competency
and training needs depend on the staff
group and clinical area.
124. A consortium of relevant Medical Royal
Colleges and professional bodies should
develop a shared skills and competency
framework relevant to all clinical and social
care staff working in this area at different levels
within the system. This should include broader
skills in adolescent care, as well as the more
specific aspects relevant to gender care.
125. Individual professional organisations
should determine which of the transferable skills
and competencies are already embedded in the
training curricula of their specific staff groups
and where the gaps are.

Summary and recommendations

126. The consortium should then develop a
curriculum to cover topics that are deemed to
be missing from existing training programmes
and curricula, and necessary for top-up training/
continuing professional development (CPD)/
credentialing for individuals working within this
area.

Recommendation 15:
NHS England should commission
a lead organisation to establish a
consortium of relevant professional
bodies to:
• develop a competency framework
• identify gaps in professional
training programmes
• develop a suite of training
materials to supplement
professional competencies,
appropriate to their clinical
field and level. This should
include a module on the holistic
assessment framework and
approach to formulation and
care planning.

Recommendation 16:
The National Provider Collaborative
should coordinate development of
evidence-based information and
resources for young people, parents
and carers. Consideration should
be given as to whether this should
be a centrally hosted NHS online
resource.

Service improvement
127. Central to any service improvement is the
systematic and consistent collection of data on
the outcomes of treatment.
128. Throughout the course of the Review, it
has been evident that there has been a failure
to reliably collect even the most basic data and
information in a consistent and comprehensive
manner; data have often not been shared or
have been unavailable.
129. It will be critical that the new services
form a learning environment. There should be
a process of continuous service improvement
and clinical reflection, with consideration of how
services should evolve as the evidence base
grows and care pathways are evaluated.
130. There remains the need for the collection
of an agreed core dataset to inform service
improvement and research, based on similar
approaches already established in other
specialties; for example, in paediatric critical
care. This will be critical to informing current
and future clinical practice and care for this
population.

Recommendation 17:
A core national data set should
be defined for both specialist and
designated local specialist services.

Recommendation 18:
The national infrastructure should
be put in place to manage data
collection and audit and this should
be used use this to drive continuous
quality improvement and research in
an active learning environment.
39

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Clinical research capacity
131. The gaps in the evidence base regarding
all aspects of gender care for children and
young people have been highlighted, from
epidemiology through to assessment, diagnosis
and intervention.
132. It is troubling that so little is known about
this cohort and their outcomes. An ongoing
programme of work is required if the new casemix of children and young people and their
needs are to be fully understood, as well as the
short- medium- and longer-term impacts of all
clinical interventions.
133. Given the uncertainties regarding the
long-term outcomes for medical and non-medical
interventions, and the broader knowledge gaps
in this area, research capacity is needed to:
• provide ongoing appraisal of new research
and rapid translation into clinical practice;
• continue to identify areas of practice where
further research is needed;
• fast-track the development of an ambitious
research portfolio that will inform policy
on assessment, support and clinical care
of children with gender dysphoria, from
presentation through to appropriate social,
psychological and medical management.
134. The appropriate research questions and
protocols will need to be developed with input
from a panel of academics, clinicians, service
users and ethicists.
135. To build on the work undertaken by the
University of York and maintain an up-to-date
understanding of this complex and fast-moving
research area, a living systematic review (where
the systematic review could be continually
updated to reflect new evidence as it becomes
available to inform the clinical approach of the
new services, ensuring it remains up-to-date
and dynamic) should be established.

40

136. Without an established research strategy
and infrastructure, the outstanding questions
relating to interventions to support this
population will remain unanswered, and the
evidence gaps will continue to be filled with
opinion and conjecture.
137. Better quality evidence is critical if the NHS
is to provide reliable, transparent information
and advice to support children, young people,
their parents and carers in making potentially
life-changing decisions.

Recommendation 19:
NHS England and the National
Institute for Health and Care
Research (NIHR) should ensure
that the academic and administrative
infrastructure to support a
programme of clinically-based
research is embedded into the
regional centres.

Recommendation 20:
A unified research strategy should
be established across the Regional
Centres, co-ordinated through the
National Provider Collaborative and
the Research Oversight Group, so
that all data collected are utilised
to best effect and for sufficient
numbers of individuals to be
meaningful.

Summary and recommendations

Recommendation 21:
To ensure that services are
operating to the highest standards
of evidence the National Institute
for Health and Care Research
(NIHR) should commission a living
systematic review to inform the
evolving clinical approach.

Pathways
138. Clear criteria are needed for referral to
services along the pathway from primary to
tertiary care so that gender-questioning children
and young people who seek help from the NHS
have equitable access to services.
139. When the Review commenced, access
to the specialist GIDS service was unusual in
that the service accepted referrals directly from
primary care (a GP) and from non-healthcare
professionals including teachers and youth
workers.
140. NHS England has since consulted on a
proposal for all referrals to come via secondary
care and the Review supports this approach.
141. This report sets out the different roles and
responsibilities within the Review’s proposed
service delivery model; from primary through to
tertiary care and discharge and how the network
should ensure that children and young people
are appropriately engaged within the health
system.

Pathways within the service
142. Discussions with clinicians highlighted the
importance of differentiating the subgroups
within the referred population who may be at risk
and/or need more urgent support, assessment
or intervention; there may also be subgroups
for whom early advice to parents or school staff
may be a more appropriate first step.
143. Children and young people should be able
to move flexibly between different elements of
the service in a step-up or step-down model,
allowing them and their parents/carers to make
decisions at their own pace without requiring
rereferral into the system.
144. The current evidence base suggests that
children who present with gender incongruence
at a young age are most likely to desist before
puberty, although for a small number the
incongruence will persist. Parents and families
need support and advice about how best to
support their children in a balanced and nonjudgemental way. Helping parents and families
to ensure that options remain open and flexible
for the child, whilst ensuring that the child is
able to function well in school and socially is an
important aspect of care provision and there
should be no lower age limit for accessing such
help and support.

Recommendation 22:
Within each regional network,
a separate pathway should be
established for pre-pubertal children
and their families. Providers
should ensure that pre-pubertal
children and their parents/carers
are prioritised for early discussion
with a professional with relevant
experience.

41

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

149. The Review requested data on the

Transfer to adult gender services demographics of referrals into NHS adult
145. Currently, significant numbers of young
people are being transferred from GIDS to adult
services. Some will have been under the care of
GIDS, however another group will still have been
waiting for their first GIDS appointment at the time
they turned 17, and their wait will now count in their
wait for adult services.This is increasing waiting
lists for adult services and disadvantaging older
adults seeking NHS support.

gender clinics, which demonstrated that the
majority of referrals were birth-registered
females under the age of 25.
150. While provision within the adult Gender
Dysphoria Clinics (GDCs) is outside the scope
of this Review, a number of current and past
GDC staff have contacted the Review in
confidence with their concerns.

146. This represents a significant risk of
discontinuity in clinical care and loss to
follow-up. It also means that data on outcomes,
which are essential to improve the knowledge
base, are lost.

151. The Review will set out the main points
of concern to NHS England separately.
However, the clinicians highlighted the changing
adult demographic and same complexity of
presentation as seen in gender services for
children and young people.

147. A follow-through service would benefit
both this younger population and the adult
population. This will have the added benefit
in the longer-term of increasing the capacity
of adult provision across the country as more
gender services are established.

152. As the services for children and young
people develop, a strategic approach will be
needed to ensure that adult service provision
takes account of different population needs
and emerging evidence.

148. This would be consistent with the other
service areas supporting young people that are
selectively moving to a ‘0-25 years’ service to
improve continuity of care.

Recommendation 23:
NHS England should establish followthrough services for 17-25-year-olds
at each of the Regional Centres,
either by extending the range of the
regional children and young people’s
service or through linked services, to
ensure continuity of care and support
at a potentially vulnerable stage in
their journey. This will also allow
clinical, and research follow up data
to be collected.

42

Recommendation 24:
Given that the changing
demographic presenting to
children and young people’s
services is reflected in a change
of presentations to adult services,
NHS England should consider
bringing forward any planned update
of the adult service specification
and review the model of care and
operating procedures.

Summary and recommendations

Detransition
153. NHS gender services should support
all those presenting with gender incongruence
and dysphoria, whether that be to transition,
detransition or retransition. Those who
detransition should be carefully monitored in
a supportive setting, particularly when coming
off hormone treatments.
154. The Review has heard that people
experiencing regret may be hesitant to engage
with the gender services that supported them
through their initial transition. Consideration
should be given to whether existing service
specifications need to be adapted to specifically
provide detransition pathways or whether this
should be a separately commissioned service.
This should be in consultation with people who
have been through detransition.

Recommendation 25:
NHS England should ensure there
is provision for people considering
detransition, recognising that they
may not wish to reengage with the
services whose care they were
previously under.

Private provision
155. The Review has been told that a number
of young people have sought private provision
whilst on the waiting list for GIDS, and about
families trying to balance the risks of obtaining
unregulated and potentially dangerous hormone
supplies over the internet with the ongoing
trauma of prolonged waits for assessment.
Feedback from the lived experience focus
groups presents this as “a forced choice
(because the NHS provision is not accessible

in a timely way) rather than a preference.” The
ongoing cost of this treatment and the subsequent
monitoring can be prohibitive for some.
156. GPs have expressed concern about
being pressurised to prescribe hormones after
these have been initiated by private providers
and that there is a lack of clarity around their
responsibilities in relation to monitoring.
157. The Review understands and shares
the concerns about the use of unregulated
medications and of providers that are not
regulated within the UK. Any clinician who
ascertains that a young person is being given
drugs from an unregulated source should make
the young person and their family aware of the
risks of such treatment.
158. In terms of shared care and prescribing
responsibility, this should mirror other areas
of practice. Specifically, no clinician should
prescribe outside their competence, nor should
GPs be expected to enter into a shared care
arrangement with a private provider, particularly
if that private provider is acting outside NHS
guidance. Additionally, pharmacists are
responsible for ensuring medications prescribed
to patients are suitable.
159. However, there should be an arrangement
to carry out relevant investigations to ensure
a young person is not coming to harm (for
example, monitoring bone density).
160. In the case of puberty blockers, NHS
England has set out that these will only be
available under a research protocol. On
entering the trial, the young person will have
a number of tests to establish their baseline
levels for monitoring purposes (for example,
in relation to bone density), as well as other
initial assessments. If an individual were to
take puberty blockers outside the study, their
eligibility may be affected.

43

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Recommendation 26:

Recommendation 28:

The Department of Health and
Social Care and NHS England
should consider the implications
of private healthcare on any future
requests to the NHS for treatment,
monitoring and/or involvement in
research. This needs to be clearly
communicated to patients and
private providers.

The NHS and the Department
of Health and Social Care
needs to review the process and
circumstances of changing NHS
numbers and find solutions to
address the clinical and research
implications.

Recommendation 27:
The Department of Health and
Social Care should work with
the General Pharmaceutical
Council to define the dispensing
responsibilities of pharmacists of
private prescriptions and consider
other statutory solutions that would
prevent inappropriate overseas
prescribing.

NHS number
161. Currently, when a person requests to
change their gender on their NHS record,
NHS guidance requires that they are issued
with a new NHS number. This has implications
for safeguarding and clinical management of
these children and young people and could
affect longer-term health management
(for example, the screening they are offered).
162. From a research perspective, the issuing
of new NHS numbers makes it more difficult to
identify the long-term outcomes for a patient
population for whom the evidence base is
currently weak.
44

Implementation
163. The Review recognises that delivery
of the aspirations set out in this report will
require significant changes. The move to the
proposed service model will require a phased
approach and it may be several years before
the full model is operational across the country.
Pragmatic strategic and operational plans are
required, that set out the steps that will be taken
to realise the service transformation.
164. Governance needs to be put in place
to oversee implementation of the required
changes and provide system-wide leadership.
This should be external to the Specialised
Commissioning division and draw clinical
leadership from professional bodies. Given
the level of external interest in these services
progress against the implementation plans
should be reported.
165. While the Review has focused on children
and young people with gender incongruence
and gender-related distress, the NHS needs to
be ambitious in its provision for all children and
young people seeking NHS support.

Summary and recommendations

166. NHS provision for children and young
people across the board requires greater
service and workforce development and
sustained investment. Without this we are letting
down future generations. NHS England should
use this opportunity to integrate investment
and development of gender services with the
ambitions set out in the NHS Long Term Plan for
broader provision, with consideration given to a
complex adolescent pathway.

Recommendation 29:
NHS England should develop an
implementation plan with clear
milestones towards the future clinical
and service model. This should
have board level oversight and be
developed collaboratively with those
responsible for the health of children
and young people more generally to
support greater integration to meet
the wide-ranging needs of complex
adolescents.

Recommendation 30:
NHS England should establish
robust and comprehensive contract
management and audit processes
and requirements around the
collection of data for the provision
of these services. These should
be adhered to by the providers
responsible for delivering these
services for children and young
people

Wider system learning
167. Clinical staff need support and guidance
from their professional bodies to apply the
evidence-based approaches described in
this report. The consortium brought together
to develop training resources should also
be a vehicle for agreeing professional
guidance for their respective clinical groups.
This collaborative approach should include
processes for listening to the community the
service is built for.

Recommendation 31:
Professional bodies must come
together to provide leadership and
guidance on the clinical management
of this population taking account of
the findings of this report.
168. Innovation is important if medicine is to
move forward, but there must be a proportionate
level of monitoring, oversight and regulation
that does not stifle progress, but prevents creep
of unproven approaches into clinical practice.
Innovation must draw from and contribute to the
evidence base.

Recommendation 32:
Wider guidance applicable to
all NHS services should be
developed to support providers
and commissioners to ensure
that innovation is encouraged but
that there is appropriate scrutiny
and clinical governance to avoid
incremental creep of practice in the
absence of evidence.

45

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Approach

46

Approach

1. Methodology
1.1 At the outset, the Review established
the core principles that would underpin the
approach taken.
• The welfare of the child or young
person must remain paramount in all
considerations. At the centre of the
Review is a group of children and young
people who are seeking support, and our
responsiblity is to devise a model of care
that will safeguard their best interests and
set each one of them on a pathway that
helps them thrive as an individual.
• The Review has to be grounded in a
thorough examination of the most robust
existing evidence. To support this, we
commissioned systematic reviews on a
range of issues from epidemiology through
to treatment approaches, and international
models of current practice.
• The (formal) evidence would only provide
part of the picture and we needed to
hear from a range of people; crucially the
children and young people at the centre
of the review, but also their parents and
carers, as well as young adults who have
been through gender care in the UK and
could give a longer-term perspective.
• We also needed input from a very wide
range of professionals from different
agencies who have relevant experience
and could contribute to our understanding
of the population and the evidence.
• Finally, we wanted to ensure that key
findings were shared as quickly as possible,
through publication of interim findings,
blogs, and any communications with NHS
England over the course of the Review.

1.2 In considering the questions set out in
the terms of reference, this Review can only
set out what is known and unknown and think
about how the NHS can best respond safely,
effectively and compassionately, leaving some
issues for wider societal debate. However,
in order to gain as broad an understanding
as possible we drew on several sources of
information, underpinned by basic scientific
and clinical principles.

Understanding evidence
1.3 The Review’s interim report in 2022 set
out the importance of evidence-based service
development and highlighted major gaps and
weaknesses in the evidence base underpinning
the clinical management of children and
young people with gender incongruence and
gender dysphoria, including for the appropriate
approaches to assessment and treatment.
In particular, it became apparent how little was
known about the medium- and longer-term
outcomes for children and young people
receiving NHS support and/or treatment.
1.4 The quality of the evidence base for
interventions for gender incongruence
and gender dysphoria is a source of debate
and contention. This makes it very difficult
for young people and their families to know
what information to trust and what to expect
from the treatments offered.
1.5 A fundamental principle of clinical medicine
is that treatments should be offered based on
the best available evidence.
1.6 In evidence-based practice, three factors
determine treatment decisions; research
evidence, clinical expertise and patient values.

47

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Figure 3: Components of evidence-based
medicine of evidence-based medicine
Components

Clinical
expertise

1.8 The doctor will also point out possible side
effects; for example, it has a 5% chance of
causing weight gain. If the patient already happens
to be very distressed about being overweight, they
may not feel that the potential benefits of the drug
outweigh the risk that they may gain weight.

Treatment
Decision

Patient
values

1.7 For example, if a doctor diagnoses a patient
with depression and recommends a particular
antidepressant medication, they should
invariably explain that there is strong evidence
that the drug is effective; for example, it has an
85% chance of improving the depression.

Research
evidence

1.9 The doctor will then consider other options;
for example, there may be a different drug that
does not cause weight gain but increases risk
of suicide. If the patient has made a recent
suicide attempt that would not be an appropriate
alternative to offer to this patient.
1.10 Without this evidence for benefits and
harms, it is hard for the doctor to advise the
patient, and for the patient to decide whether
they want to try the proposed treatment.

48

Approach

Explanatory Box 1:
Principles of treatments studies
The following information is intended to provide some accessible explanations of the
strengths and limitations of the evidence and treatment studies used to inform the Review’s
recommendations.
• The development of a new drug or treatment involves a number of steps to ensure that
it is safe (there are minimal harms or side effects) and effective (there is a good chance
the drug will produce the intended benefit). If another treatment already exists for the
condition, an important step is to test whether the new treatment is better, and whether
it is cost effective. This is best quantified by undertaking a randomised trial. Sometimes
a drug may have severe side effects, but if the condition is life threatening, these side
effects may be considered acceptable (for example, some chemotherapies for cancer).
• An important principle in treatment trials is equipoise. This means that the researchers
genuinely do not know which treatment is better - the existing treatment or the new
treatment. If they have very strong reasons to believe the new treatment is better, or
indeed worse, they cannot ethically carry out a trial. Occasionally a trial may be stopped
early if it is obvious that the new treatment is causing harm or is strongly beneficial.
Some types of treatment studies
• The ‘gold standard’ trial is a randomised controlled trial (RCT). In this type of trial there
are at least two groups. One is given the new treatment and the other, the control
group, is given a standard or alternative treatment, or perhaps no treatment. Patients
are randomly allocated to the two groups, and it is important to make sure there are no
important differences between the two groups.
• The term blind or blinded is used in RCTs. There are different levels of blinding: firstly,
if researchers are doing the assessments, they should not know which group a patient
has been allocated to. Secondly, the patient can be blinded so that they do not know if
they are on the new treatment or the original treatment, or even on a placebo (dummy
pills). Finally, the treating doctor (or team) should ideally be blind to the group allocation,
so their treatment of the patients does not differ.
• Participants in a study must be told about blinding processes when they consent to be
in the trial. It is not always possible for people to be blind to a treatment; for example, in
a trial of acupuncture versus physiotherapy, patients will know which treatment they are
receiving. In these situations, people interpreting the results of the study must take into
account any possible placebo effect. This is when people believe that the treatment will
produce a beneficial outcome and having this belief results in them feeling better.

49

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

There are hardly any RCTs in children and young people receiving endocrine treatment
for gender incongruence/dysphoria, but the following are the most commonly reported
types of studies:
• Two types of studies that are sometimes used to look at the effects of puberty blockers
and masculinising/feminising hormones are cohort studies and cross-sectional studies,
which are different ways of looking at outcomes in groups who did or didn’t get a particular
intervention. These are all called observational studies whereas RCTs are called
experimental studies. This is because in cohort or cross-sectional studies the researcher
did not allocate which patients receive an intervention. There may still be a comparison
group, but participants will not have been randomly allocated to the two groups.
• The most common study for patients receiving puberty suppression is a pre-post
study. This is where study participants are assessed before and after they receive an
intervention. Because there is no comparison group of individuals who did not receive
the treatment, and because one cannot rule out changes that would have occurred over
time without treatment, it is not possible to draw strong conclusions from these studies.
Pitfalls of treatment trials
• A major problem in making sense of trial findings is bias. There are many ways in which
results can be biased. For example, if 50% of the sample drops out, this would be referred
to as a high attrition rate. It’s possible that the people who remained in the study are those
who responded well to the treatment, whereas those who dropped out did so because
the treatment wasn’t working for them or they had bad side effects. This could result in a
positive bias in the study outcomes; in other words showing an effect when there isn’t one.
It could also fail to show the side effects that caused people to drop out.
• Another way of biasing results is if the patients in the treatment and control groups
differ in some way; for example, one group has more people who are younger, or sicker.
Researchers will assess the groups on several measures and compare them to see if they
are similar at the start of the study (baseline assessment). Random allocation of people
to the study groups and large numbers of participants help reduce the risk of differences
between study groups.
• It is very important to get the inclusion and exclusion criteria of a study right (that is,
which patients can and cannot be included). For example, a trial might report that a
painkiller is highly effective, but if it turns out that only people with osteoarthritis in the
knee were included it would mean that the results cannot be generalised to patients with
headache. Although the drug may work very well for headache, it is not possible to be
sure about this on the basis of the findings of this particular study.

50

Approach

• In any design where patients are not blinded and know they are getting a particular
drug, or where they have chosen a specific treatment rather than being randomised
to one, they may show improvement because of a placebo effect (that is, they believe
that the treatment will produce a beneficial outcome).
• Sometimes there are confounding factors in a study, such as the patient getting another
treatment at the same time as the trial treatment. Though randomisation and blinding
minimise the risk of bias and confounding, this is not completely watertight.
• There must also be enough patients in a trial (the term ‘sufficiently powered’ is often
used where there are) to be sure the results reflect the range of possible outcomes
and do not give a ‘positive´ result by chance, a so-called Type 1 (or alpha) error. Study
outcome measures are generally reported as the average for a group, but the range
is usually also given and can be very wide. For example, if the average outcome for a
group is 5 points out of a possible 10, a range of 2-9 would indicate much more varied
outcomes across the group than a range of 4-6. Size influences whether the reported
outcomes are statistically significant. In very small studies, for example one with only
four patients put on a treatment and in which three got better and one got worse, it
would not be possible to understand the full range of possible outcomes. Furthermore,
the benefits for three individuals could have happened by chance. For a result to
be statistically significant, it must be unlikely that the result could have happened
by chance. This is why substantial numbers of participants are required and a key
requirement of any trial is a pre-recruitment estimate of how many will be needed for the
study to produce meaningful results.
• There are many other potential problems, some of which include:
- unconscious bias in questionnaire design where the questions are written
in a way that prompts a more favourable response;
- using the wrong kind of analysis for the available data;
- not following up for long enough to see the full benefits or harms of a treatment;
- seeing an improvement because patients were improving spontaneously over time;
- publication bias where, for example, only positive results are published.

51

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Building on evidence
Figure 4: What has informed the Review?
What has informed the review?

Evidence

Professional Input

• Series of systematic reviews
• Qualitative research

• Listening sessions with clinicans &
other professionals

• Quantitative research

• Focus groups with GIDS staff

• GIDS discharge summary audit

• Programme of thematic roundtables
• Professional panel & online survey
• Clinical Expert Group
• Workshops & discussions with frontline
staff, professional bodies, national
organisations & system leaders

Lived Experience
• Weekly listening sessions with
individual service users & parents
• Focus groups with young people
& young adults

International Sources

• Regular meetings with support &
advocacy groups

• Guideline appraisal

• Existing documented insights into
lived experience
• Personal narratives

• International survey
• Meetings with international
clinicians & policy makers

1.11 The Review has sought to better
understand the existing evidence, as well as
fill some of the gaps through qualitative and
quantitative research relevant to the Review’s
terms of reference (Appendix 1).

1.13 The systematic reviews were
commissioned to look at:

1.12 Following a national open procurement
process,the University of York was
commissioned to deliver an independent
research programme. The aim was to provide
the Review with the best available collation of
published evidence relevant to epidemiology,
clinical management, models of care and
outcomes, and to understand the experiences
and perspectives of service users, their families
and clinicians.

ii. What are the appropriate referral,
assessment and treatment pathways for
children with gender dysphoria and/or
gender-related distress?

52

i. How has the population of children
presenting with gender dysphoria and/or
gender-related distress changed over time?

iii. What are the short, medium and long-term
outcomes for children with gender dysphoria
and/or gender-related distress?

Approach

1.14 Additionally, an appraisal of an international
guidelines and international survey were
undertaken to supplement this information, looking
at evidence application and clinical practice in
other comparable healthcare systems.

1.15 Finally, the qualitative and quantitative
studies were designed to try and fill some
of the gaps in the existing literature.
1.16 The Review collated the findings from
these studies and used them to determine the
most appropriate clinical approach and models
of care, assessment and treatment.

Table 1: Overview of academic research programme commissioned by the Review
RESEARCH TYPE

RESEARCH TITLE

REPORT IN-TEXT CITATION

Characteristics of children and adolescents referred to
specialist gender services: a systematic review

Taylor et al: Patient characteristics

Impact of social transition in relation to gender for
children and adolescents: a systematic review

Hall et al: Social transition

Psychosocial support interventions for children
and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or
incongruence: A systematic review

Heathcote et al: Psychosocial
support

Interventions to suppress puberty in adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
a systematic review

Taylor et al: Puberty suppression

Masculinising and feminising hormone interventions for
adolescents with gender dysphoria or incongruence: a
systematic review

Taylor et al: M/F hormones

Care pathways of children and adolescents referred to
specialist gender services: a systematic review

Taylor et al: Care pathways

Clinical guidelines for children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
a systematic review of guideline quality (part 1)

Taylor et al: Guidelines 1:
Appraisal

Clinical guidelines for children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence: a
systematic review of recommendations (part 2)

Taylor et al: Guidelines 2:
Synthesis

I N T E R N AT I O N A L
S U RV E Y

Gender services for children and adolescents across
the EU-15+ countries: an online survey

Hall et al: Clinic survey

S U M M A RY R E P O R T

The epidemiology, care pathways, outcomes, and
experiences of children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria/incongruence : a series of linked systematic
reviews and an international survey

Systematic review summary
(Appendix 2)

Q UA L I TAT I V E ST U DY

Qualitative Research Summary: Narrative accounts of
gender questioning

Qualitative study summary
(Appendix 3)
Data linkage study (Appendix 4)

Q UA N T I TAT I V E

Overview of Study Development: Assessment,
Management and Outcomes for Children and Young
People Referred to a National Gender Identity
Development Service
Preliminary report: Epidemiology and Outcomes for
Children and Young People with Gender Dysphoria:
Retrospective Cohort Study Using Electronic Primary
Care Records

CPRD study (Appendix 5)

SYST E M I C R E V I E W S

I N T E R N AT I O N A L
G U I D E L I N ES

ST U D I ES

53

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Research governance
1.17 The original research studies were
reviewed by the Health Research Authority’s
(HRA) Research Ethics Committee, to
ensure the interests, safety, and wellbeing of
participants were protected. Where the research
was to involve access to pseudonymised patient
datasets, approval was also sought from the
HRA’s Confidentiality Advisory Group. This
assessment ensures the research complies
with the Data Protection Act 2018.
1.18 The systematic reviews were registered
on an international database of prospective
research (PROSPERO) to avoid research
duplication, promote transparency, and
minimise risk of bias.

1.19 The original research studies were
reviewed by the Health Research Authority’s
(HRA) Research Ethics Committee, to ensure
the interests, safety, and wellbeing of those
affected were being protected. Where the
research was going to involve access to
pseudonymised patient data sets, approval
was also sought from the HRA’s Confidentiality
Advisory Group. This assessment ensures
compliance of the research with the Data
Protection Act 2018.
1.20 Final HRA approval ensured overall
integrity of the research by bringing together
the assessment of governance and legal
compliance.

Systemic reviews
Explanatory Box 2:
Systemic reviews
• The highest form of evidence is that generated by a systematic review (Figure 5).
A systematic review is different from a general review article. It is a summary of the
literature on a particular question that uses explicitly defined and reproducible methods
to systematically search, critically appraise, and synthesise primary research information
(Cochrane, 2016; NIHRtv, 2010). It is designed to be reproducible, reliable and to
eliminate bias.
• Standardised quality assessment tools or questionnaires are available for assessing
different types of studies. This ensures that, as far as is possible, different people
appraising a paper will come to similar conclusions.

54

Approach

Figure 5: Pyramid of standards of evidence

Filtered
infor mation

SYSTEMATIC
REVIEWS AND
META-ANALYSES

RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIALS
Infor mation
qualit y

COHORT
STUDIES

Unf iltered
infor mation

CASE-CONTROLLED
STUDIES
CASE SERIES
AND REPORTS

BACKGROUND INFORMATION
AND EXPERT OPINION
Infor mation volume
Source: Reproduced with permission from: OpenMD. (2021, July 17). Levels of evidence.
Levels of Evidence in Medical Research. https://openmd.com/guide/levels-of-evidence

Figure 6: Steps in a systematic review

Synthesise
data & conduct
Appraise studies meta-analysis
& extract data

Formulate
question

Deﬁne
inclusion/
exclusion
criteria

Perform
systemic
search

Produce report
& analysis

Screen & select
relevant studies

55

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

• The purpose of synthesising the data is to combine multiple different studies to get an
overall impression of the strength of the evidence; for example, in favour or against
a particular intervention. To do this, the reviewers need to assess the quality of the
studies in terms of recruitment, bias, design, analysis and all the other factors described
above. They will only include studies that meet a quality standard. Provided that those
studies have used similar measures and outcomes, their outcomes can be combined
(synthesised) across a much larger sample of participants.
• GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations)
is the system widely used by organisations such as the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE), Cochrane and the World Health Organization (WHO)
to summarise the quality of evidence and make clinical recommendations (GRADE
working group, n.d.). There are four levels of certainty about results:
- High certainty - The authors have a lot of confidence that the true effect is
similar to the estimated effect.
- Moderate certainty - The authors believe that the true effect is probably close
to the estimated effect.
- Low certainty - The true effect might be markedly different from the estimated
effect.
- Very low certainty - The true effect is probably markedly different from the
estimated effect.
• The certainty is not just based on what kind of trial is used, but also the various pitfalls
set out above. So, for example, a RCT will be expected to produce results of high
certainty, but if there is high attrition and lots of other sources of bias and confounding,
the certainty will drop.
• GRADE is commonly used to describe not just single studies, but the overall quality of
evidence on a particular question posed in a systematic review.

1.21 The University of York is the home of the
Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, one of
three bodies funded by the National Institute for
Health and Care Research (NIHR) to provide a
systematic review service to the NHS.
1.22 The systematic reviews were commissioned
because they are considered to provide the
highest level of evidence (Figure 5).

56

1.23 A single search strategy was developed
for all the systematic reviews to identify studies
examining gender dysphoria, gender-related
distress or gender incongruence in children/
adolescents. The search was conducted
between 13 and 23 May 2021 and updated on
27 April 2022. The reference lists of eligible
studies and any relevant systematic reviews
including clinical guidelines that were identified
were also checked.

Approach

Figure 7: Overview of studies included in the systematic reviews, international survey
Overview
of studies
and guideline
appraisals
undertaken by the University of York

Information from 113,269
children and young people (CYP)
across 18 countries

11

10

Papers on the imact of
social transition in relation
to gender for CYP

24
Papers reporting care
pathways of CYP referred
to gender services

131

Papers describing
characteristics of CYP
referred to gender
services

Papers on
psychosocial support
interventions for CYP

Epidemiology, care
pathways, outcomes and
experiences of children
and young people with
gender incongruence or
gender dysphoria

50

Papers on
interventions to
suppress puberty

53
Survey data from

15

CYP gender services
in 8 countries

23
Guidelines or position
statements for CYP
gender services

Papers on
masculinising or
feminising hormone
interventions

Overview of studies included in the systematic reviews, international survey

Source: The epidemiology, care
pathways,
outcomes,
experiences
of children
andofadolescents
experiencing
and
guideline
appraisalsand
undertaken
by the
University
York
gender dysphoria/incongruence: a series of linked systematic reviews and an international survey report by
University of York.

1.24 Overall, searches yielded 28,147 records.
Figure 7 shows the number of studies that
met the criteria for inclusion. In addition, the
research team monitored for and appraised
relevant references that were published after
the primary search.

1.25 Most of the studies in the systematic
reviews were cohort, cross-sectional or
pre-post design, explanations for which
can be found in explanatory box 1 and on
the NICE website (NICE, 2012).

57

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

International guideline reviews
and survey of gender clinics
1.26 Achieving consensus on the appropriate
approach to care for gender-questioning
children and young people is challenging both in
the UK and internationally. An essential starting
point was to obtain an appraisal and synthesis
of international guidelines in order to consider
whether practice was transferable to the UK.
1.27 Recognising that not all aspects of service
delivery were documented in local guidelines
and that some countries had changed their
approach since their guidelines were written,
a survey of gender clinics for children and
adolescents across the UK and EU-15+
countries was carried out. This aimed to
identify: the range of services provided across
a group of countries with similar health services;
and consistency/divergence in practice.

Quantitative research
1.29 The Clinical Practice Research Datalink
(CPRD) collects anonymised patient data from
a network of GP practices across the UK to
support clinical studies. For more than 30 years,
research using CPRD data and services has
informed clinical guidance and best practice.
1.30 The Epidemiology & Outcomes for
Children and Young People with Gender
Dysphoria study, commissioned by the Review,
utilised linked primary and secondary data from
the CPRD.
1.31 The overall aim was to use electronic
primary care records to describe the epidemiology
of gender dysphoria in people aged 18 and under
in England from 2009 to 2021.

1.28 The results of the review of guidelines
and international survey are detailed throughout
this report.

Explanatory Box 3:
Qualitative versus quantitative studies
• Quantitative research generates numerical or measurable data, whereas qualitative
research generates information about subjective experiences, feelings and thoughts.
Both types of research make a unique contribution to considerations about service
provision, treatment options and patient-centred care.
• The methods for conducting qualitative research are as robust as the methods for
quantitative research, and also involve identifying a question, and then collecting,
analysing, and interpreting data, although the data will be interview-based rather than
numerical.

58

Approach

Data linkage study

Qualitative research

1.32 Little is known about the support and
interventions received by the children and
young people who accessed the Gender
Identity Development Service (GIDS) and
their outcomes.

1.36 The Review commissioned a participative,
qualitative research project with the aim of
understanding the full range of experiences
and outcomes for young people with gender
dysphoria. This research used robust
internationally endorsed methods appropriate
for qualitative research.

1.33 The data linkage study, using data held
by the NHS, was commissioned to improve
the level and quality of evidence for their
treatment and care. by using existing data held
by the NHS. Data from GIDS, hospital wards,
outpatient clinics, emergency departments and
adult gender dysphoria clinics (GDCs) would
be used to track the journeys of all children and
young people (approximately 9,000) referred
to GIDS through the system and provide a
population-level evidence base of the different
pathways people take and the outcomes.
1.34 The objectives stated in the study protocol
were:
i. To describe the clinical and demographic
characteristics of this population of children
and their clinical management in the GIDS
service.
ii. To assess the intermediate outcomes of
this population of children utilising national
healthcare data.
1.35 There have been challenges in progressing
this study and the findings are not available to
inform this report.
Further details are contained in Chapter 15
and Appendix 4.

1.37 It sought to capture children’s, young
people’s and young adults’ experiences
of gender-related dysphoria/distress, their
perspectives on their journeys, and their views
on how services could and should be delivered
in the future, exploring barriers or facilitators to
providing this care.
1.38 The study also gathered the perspectives
of parents/carers and professionals delivering
services on the referral, assessment and
treatment pathways currently open to them.
1.39 The objectives of the study were:
i. To explore how children, young people
and young adults understand, respond and
negotiate gender-related dysphoria/distress
and discomfort within the context of their
social networks.
ii. To examine the perspectives, understandings
and responses of parents (or carers),
including how they support their child.
iii. To investigate how children, young people,
young adults and their families experience
and negotiate current referral, assessment
and possible treatment and intervention
options within the national specialist
service referral, assessment and (possible)
treatment.
iv. To understand the role and experiences
of care professionals who offer support,
including identifying shared and potentially
divergent views of what constitutes optimal
care.

59

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Stakeholder engagement
1.40 In addition to the formal qualitative
research, the Review has been underpinned
by an extensive programme of proactive
engagement.
1.41 Support and advocacy groups advised
that to hear from the young people at the heart
of the Review opportunities needed to be
created where they felt safe, could be supported
before, during and after their contribution, and
would be engaged around topics on which they
have a genuine ability to inform and influence
decisions.
1.42 The sensitivity of the subject matter,
coupled with the fierce public debate, meant
that some of the usual methods one might
employ when conducting a review of this kind
were not appropriate. Indeed, one of the major
challenges for the Review has been the difficulty
in having open, honest debate as people with
differing views can find it uncomfortable to sit
together in the same room or on the same stage.

It was abundantly clear that opportunities for
people to contribute would need to be carefully
navigated and well planned.
1.43 A mixed-methods approach was taken
that prioritised two categories of stakeholders:
• People with relevant lived experience
(direct or as a parent/carer) and
organisations working with LGBTQ+
children and young people generally.
• Clinicians and other relevant professionals
with responsibility for providing care and
support to children and young people within
specialist gender services and beyond.
1.44 Overall, the Review has met with over
1,000 individuals, some in one-to-one meetings
and some in bespoke meetings on a particular
topic or others focused on building awareness
and improving understanding of the issues
among interested parties and organisations.
Below is an outline of the structured processes
employed.

Figure 8: Proactive engagement methods
Focus Groups

Listening Sessions

Collecting insights, thoughts and feedback in small group

Opportunities for the chair and review team

discussions looking at set questions. Some groups were led

to hear directly from staff, clinicians, professionals,

by the Review and some facilitated by outside organisations.

young people and parents in a semi-structured 1:1 process.

Clinical Workshops

Roundtable Discussions

Thematic discucssions where participants contribute

Facilitated discussions to explore specific questions or aspects

to drive thinking on a particular topic area and co-produce

of the review in greater depths, based on presented evidence

potential areas for recommendations eg service model.

and emerging thinking. Generating consensus where possible.

Surveys

Regular Engagement Meetings

Collecting insights, thoughts and feedback from

Meetings with specific organisations or audiences throughout

targeted audiences on specific questions.

the lifetime of the review to keep stakeholders informed of progress
and understand people’s thoughts on the emerging thinking.

60

Approach

Lived experience engagement
Personal narratives
1.45 In the early stages of the work the team
met with individuals who had conducted
comparable reviews and inquiries to learn
what they had done to ensure that the views of
people affected were captured. Consideration
was given to the merits of making an open
call for evidence but, unlike for formal public
inquiries, there would be no legal status for the
information being provided. It was conceded
that with no formal process or capacity to
analyse the submissions and validate their
authenticity, the Review ran the risk of raising
expectations and collecting a large volume of
potentially sensitive information that it would not
be able to effectively process.
1.46 However, the Review did receive a number
of written submissions describing individuals’
personal experiences of gender services or
gender identity exploration. While there was no
formal process for analysing these submissions,
all were read by the Review to see if the issues
they raised were consistent with what had been
heard from other sources or were new and
relevant. If the latter, the individual was invited to
attend a listening session.
Listening sessions (lived experience and
professional)
1.47 The Review Chair held weekly listening
sessions to hear directly from people with
primary lived experience (individuals who
identify as transgender, non-binary, gender
fluid and/or who have been through a period
of gender-questioning) or secondary lived
experience relevant to the Review (a parent/
carer of a gender-questioning child or young
person or a clinician or other professional
with direct and relevant experience working
with these children and young people). These
confidential sessions have provided the Review

with invaluable insight into how services are
currently experienced. They have contributed
to the Review’s understanding of the positive
experiences of living as a trans or gender
diverse person as well as uncertainties,
complexities and challenges faced by children,
young people and their families/carers.
Focus groups - (lived experience)
1.48 In autumn 2022, the Review team hosted
a series of focus groups specifically to discuss
the proposed data linkage study. Due to the
ages of those whose data would be accessed
for the research, and concern that the sessions
could attract interest from those outside the
scope of the study, it was deemed inappropriate
to issue an open invitation to the sessions.
Instead, the focus groups were promoted via the
GIDS stakeholder group, related NHS-funded
services, and support and advocacy groups.
While this did restrict the team’s ability to recruit
participants, it ensured that the sessions were
conducted in a safe and protected environment.
1.49 Reflecting on and responding to the
previous recruitment difficulties, in spring
2023 the Review commissioned (through an
Expression of Interest process) six support and
advocacy organisations to facilitate 18 focus
groups to better understand the thoughts and
ideas of young people and adults (aged 14-30)
with lived experience. This approach was taken
as the commissioned organisations had access
to the target audience and were able to provide
a supportive environment in which participants
felt comfortable and confident to speak freely.

61

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

1.50 The Review developed three sets of
questions to be used in the groups. These
explored:
• Past and current experiences of services
including assessment, diagnosis and
expectations of clinicians.
• Thoughts and ideas about future services
including location, environment and support
and the interventions they would want
access to.
• Information needs and wider support.
View summary report.
Regular meetings with support and
advocacy organisations
1.51 The Review met regularly with support
and advocacy organisations for which support
of gender-questioning young people is their
primary function or a significant element of
their work. Separate meetings were held with
each organisation to encourage open and frank
conversations. This two-way communication has
provided the Review with a better understanding
of how service users are experiencing
services and policy changes, and given these
organisations a greater level of understanding
in the work of the Review.

Clinical and professional
engagement
1.52 The Review received a high level of clinical
input in a variety of forms including listening
sessions, group events and workshops (for
example, to test thinking on the proposed
future service model). Presentations and
discussion with different professional groups at
conferences or training sessions helped raise
awareness of the Review and the dilemmas
around clinical care.

62

Importantly, this created opportunities for
a much wider group of clinicians to pose
questions, share experiences and contribute to
thinking. There have also been regular meetings
with the heads of relevant Royal Colleges and
professional bodies.
Clinical Expert Group
1.53 A Clinical Expert Group was established
to consider the strength of the evidence and
findings from the Review’s research programme,
and assist the Review in achieving clinical
consensus where evidence is not available or
limited. Membership included clinical experts on
children and adolescents in relation to gender,
development, physical and mental health,
safeguarding and endocrinology.
Thematic roundtables
1.54 Roundtable discussions were facilitated
with experts in a range of associated topics
to explore specific questions in greater depth.
Roundtable discussions were held on:
• intersection of mental health, psychosexual
development and gender-related distress
• safeguarding
• workforce
• learning from lived experience
1.55 These discussions are reflected throughout
this report.
Professional panel and gender
specialists survey
1.56 In autumn 2021, in order to understand
the challenges and establish a picture of
competency, capacity and confidence among
the workforce outside the specialist gender
development service, an online professional
panel was established to explore issues around

Approach

gender identity services for children and young
people. The panel engaged in weekly individual
or group activities over a six-week period.
View summary report.
1.57 Following the conclusion of the
professional panel the Review undertook
an online survey of gender specialists clinicians and associated professionals who
predominantly or exclusively work with children
and young people who need support around
their gender identity. The survey contained
some service specific questions, but also
reflected and sought to test some of what the
Review had heard from specialists through
our listening sessions and from primary and
secondary care professionals engaged in the
professional panel activities.

1.61 The Review has drawn on GIDS’ insight,
knowledge and experience in several ways.
Senior clinical staff have participated in
workshops hosted by the Review and two
senior clinicians from GIDS sat on the Review’s
Clinical Expert Group.
1.62 In addition to the gender specialists
survey, many of the GIDS clinicians (both
current and former) have shared their
experience and thoughts in one-to-one
listening sessions and their insights have
been valuable in building understanding of
the challenges of and opportunities for
developing a new approach.
1.63 In the latter stages, the Review hosted
focus groups with GIDS staff to test and develop
emerging thinking on a number of key areas:

View summary report.

i. workforce and training

1.58 The outputs from these activities were
reported in the interim report (4.29-4.39)
and have continued to inform our work.

ii. packages of care

Engagement with gender specialists
1.59 Much of the clinical experience of working
with these children and young people resides
among staff with experience of working in GIDS.

iii. pathways and wider system working
1.64 The Review has also engaged with
clinicians working in gender services in
other countries.

1.60 Since the early stages of the Review,
the team established fortnightly meetings
with clinical and managerial leads from GIDS,
providing space to hold open conversations and
discuss challenges and ideas.

63

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Summary
1.65 The strengths and weaknesses of the
evidence base on the care of children and
young people are often misrepresented and
overstated, both in scientific publications and
social debate. Systematically reviewing and
evaluating the evidence has been fundamental
to the Review’s approach.
1.66 Hearing directly from the children and
young people at the heart of this Review, their
parents/carers and the clinicians working in
and around services trying to support them,
has provided valuable insight into the ways
in which services are currently delivered and
experienced. This has contributed immeasurably
to the Review’s understanding of the positive
experiences of living as a transgender or gender
diverse person, as well the uncertainties,
complexities and difficulties faced.

64

1.67 Pulling insights together from these
different activities has not been easy. There are
areas where there is no clear consensus and
finding a middle ground is not possible where
perspectives are so polarised.
1.68 Sometimes, there is a mismatch in
expectations between service users, their
families and advocates and what it is possible
for the NHS to provide. In those instances, the
Review has needed to think about what would
be normal practice in the NHS and then to
consider whether there is any reasonable and
rational reason for services for this cohort to
respond or operate differently.
1.69 This report describes what has been learnt
in the course of the Review and provides advice
on how the services need to operate in future.
A summary of the evidence base underpinning
each area of consideration is provided and links
to corresponding papers are provided where
available.

Approach

65

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Context

66

Context

2. History of gender services
for children and young people
2.1 This Review is about services for children
and young people who experience gender
incongruence/dysphoria or gender-related
distress. However, the evolution of care for this
group, and some of the dilemmas that have
emerged, need to be understood in the broader
context of the struggle that transgender people
have faced - and still continue to face - in
accessing care, support and understanding
of their clinical needs.
2.2 There are polarised debates about a range
of societal issues involving transgender people
in the UK, ranging from use of single sex
spaces to participation in sports. Although these
issues are outside the scope of this Review,
they have an impact on gender-questioning
young people because of the inflexibility of the
factional opinion and resulting toxicity of the
debates. Services for children and young people
have evolved within the context of this broader
picture and every person involved in this work
has been and continues to be affected by the
dialogue.

Early gender services for
children and young people
2.3 Services for children and young people with
gender incongruence started in the mid-1970s
in Canada, and in 1987 in the Netherlands. It is
important to understand the early populations
accessing these services to make sense of how
they have changed in more recent years.

2.4 The Gender Identity Development Service
(GIDS) was established in 1989 by Domenico
Di Ceglie at St George’s Hospital, London later
moving to The Tavistock and Portman NHS
Foundation Trust. Initially, the numbers seen
were small (fewer than 10 per annum in the first
few years), with pre-pubertal birth-registered
males being the largest group.
2.5 The main focus of the early services was on
therapeutic work with children and families, with
only a small proportion with persisting gender
incongruence being referred for hormone
treatment from around age 16.
2.6 Several studies from that period (Green
et al., 1987; Zucker, 1985) suggested that in a
minority (approximately 15%) of pre-pubertal
children presenting with gender incongruence,
this persisted into adulthood. The majority of
these children became same-sex attracted,
cisgender adults. These early studies were
criticised on the basis that not all the children
had a formal diagnosis of gender incongruence
or gender dysphoria, but a review of the
literature (Ristori & Steensma, 2016) noted that
later studies (Drummond et al., 2008; Steensma
& Cohen-Kettenis, 2015; Wallien et al., 2008)
also found persistence rates of 10-33% in
cohorts who had met formal diagnostic criteria
at initial assessment, and had longer follow-up
periods. It was thought at that time that if gender
dysphoria continued or intensified after puberty,
it was likely that the young person would go on
to have a transgender identity into adulthood
(Steensma et al., 2011).

67

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Emergence of the Dutch protocol
2.7 The approach to treatment changed with
the emergence of ‘the Dutch protocol’, which
was developed by Dr Peggy Cohen-Kettenis
founder of the Utrecht clinic. One of the drivers
for developing gender care services for children
was the recognition of poor mental health
outcomes for the adult transgender population,
much of which was attributed to minority stress
and difficulty “passing” in their expressed
gender (Cohen-Kettenis & Van Goozen, 1998).
2.8 In 1998, a single case study (CohenKettenis & Van Goozen, 1998) described
a female to male transition where puberty
blockers were started at age 13. The rationale
for the approach was two-fold; to support the
diagnostic procedure by buying time to think and
to improve the longer-term ability to pass in the
preferred gender.
2.9 The Dutch protocol was further elaborated
in an article in 2006 (Delemarre-van de Waal
& Cohen-Kettenis, 2006) by which time 54
patients were being treated, and in 2011 the
Dutch team published a prospective study
(de Vries et al., 2011b) of 70 patients who had
received early treatment with puberty blockers
between 2000 and 2008. Inclusion criteria were
that the patients had to be minimum age 12,
have suffered from life-long gender dysphoria
that had increased around puberty, be
psychologically stable without serious comorbid
psychiatric disorders that might interfere
with the diagnostic process, and have family
support. The authors discussed the challenge
in adolescents with an autistic spectrum
disorder (ASD) of disentangling “whether gender
dysphoria evolves from a general feeling of
being just “different” or whether a true “core”
cross-gender identity exists”.

68

2.10 The 70 patients in the study (de Vries et
al., 2011b) were a subset of a larger group of
111 cases consecutively referred for puberty
blockers; the 70 were selected because they
were the first ones ready to start the next
stage of treatment - masculinising or feminising
hormones. Of the 70 patients, 89% were samesex attracted to their birth-registered sex, with
most of the rest being bisexual. Only one patient
was exclusively heterosexual. The outcomes for
the remaining 41 cases were not reported.
2.11 During puberty suppression, there was
no change in body dysphoria, but behavioural
and emotional problems decreased, and
general functioning improved. However, not all
participants (59-73% on the various measures)
completed questionnaires after treatment, a
potential source of bias, making it difficult to
draw conclusions from the results.
2.12 A confounding factor was that all patients
in the Dutch service were seen regularly by
their psychiatrist or psychologist whilst on
puberty blockers, so it is difficult to separate the
therapeutic effects of these sessions from the
role of puberty blockers alone.

Explanatory Box 4:
Dutch protocol:
Minimum age 12, life-long gender
dysphoria increased around puberty,
psychologically stable without serious
comorbid psychiatric disorders that might
interfere with the diagnostic process and
family support.

Context

69

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Move to an affirmative model
2.13 In 2007 Norman Spack established a clinic
in Boston, USA modelled on the Dutch protocol
and began prescribing puberty blockers from
early puberty (Tanner stage 2).
2.14 Practice in the USA began to diverge
from the models of care in Canada and the
Netherlands, following instead a gender
affirmative model advocated by Diane Ehrensaft
(Eherensaft, 2017).
She described the three approaches as follows
(Ehrensaft, 2017):
“The first model, represented in the work of
Drs Susan Bradley and Ken Zucker [Canada],
assumes that young children have malleable
gender brains, so to speak, and that treatment
goals can include helping a young child accept
the gender that matches the sex assigned to
them at birth.
The second model, represented in the work
of practitioners in the Netherlands, allows that
a child may have knowledge of their gender
identity at a young age, but should wait until the
advent of adolescence before engaging in any
full transition from one gender to another.
The third model, represented in the work of an
international consortium of gender affirmative
theoreticians and practitioners, allows that
a child of any age may be cognizant of their
authentic identity and will benefit from a social
transition at any stage of development.”
2.15 The third model - the ‘affirmative model’
- has subsequently become dominant in many
countries. As a result, some gender services
have moved away from a more exploratory
approach, and this is seen by some advocacy
and support groups as a move to ‘gatekeeping’
model.
2.16 It is important to note that staff at GIDS
have told us that in their practice an affirmative
70

model can encompass respecting the young
person’s experience and sense of self whilst still
exploring the meaning of that experience in a
non-directive therapeutic relationship.

Use of puberty blockers in the UK
2.17 The ‘watchful waiting’ approach continued
in the UK until 2011, when puberty blockers
were trialled under a research protocol;
the ‘early intervention study’. This was an
uncontrolled study with inclusion criteria in line
with the original Dutch protocol, and similar
outcome measures. It is unfortunate that a
controlled study was not conducted by the
UK team, given that this was the only formal
attempt to replicate the Dutch approach using
directly comparable outcome measures. Using
the same methods as the Dutch observational
study meant that the same limitations apply; that
is, confounding of endocrine and psychological
interventions and significant attrition at follow-up.

Early intervention study
2.18 Between 2011 to 2014, 44 patients aged
12-15 were recruited to the ‘early intervention
study’ and preliminary results were reported to
The Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust Board in 2015 (Tavistock and Portman
NHS Foundation Trust Board papers, 2015),
at which point patients had received at least
one year of treatment, and at the 2016 World
Professional Association for Transgender Health
(WPATH) conference when all patients had been
follewed up for at least two years (Thoughts on
Things and Stuff, 2023).
2.19 In contrast to the Dutch group, the UK’s
preliminary findings did not demonstrate
improvement in psychological wellbeing,
and in fact some birth-registered females
had a worsening of ‘internalising’ problems
(depression, anxiety) based on parental report.
In response to the Youth Self Report Scale,
there was a significant increase after one

Context

year on treatment in adolescents scoring the
statement “I deliberately try to hurt or kill myself”
as ‘sometimes true’, especially among birthregistered females ((The Tavistock and Portman
NHS Foundation Trust Board Papers, 2015).
2.20 The early intervention study results
were not published in preprint until December
2020 (Carmichael et al., 2021). There were no
statistically significant changes reported in gender
dysphoria or mental health outcome measures
whilst on puberty blockers, and 98% proceeded to
masculinising or feminising hormones.
2.21 A secondary analysis of the data from
the Dutch and UK studies demonstrated that
the two groups were the same at baseline on
the key mental health outcome measures that
were used to assess changes (Biggs, 2022).

Figure 9 shows the level of improvement in
the Dutch cohort and the lack of improvement
in the UK cohort after puberty suppression.
The reasons for this are not clear but may be
due to other baseline differences in the two
samples, or differences in the quality of care
offered by the two clinics.
2.22 A subsequent re-analysis of the early
intervention study (McPherson & Freedman,
2023), using original anonymised data from the
study, took account of the direction of change
in mental health outcomes for individual young
people rather than just reporting group means.
This secondary analysis found that 37-70%
experience no reliable change in distress across
time points, 15-34% deteriorate and 9-29%
reliably improve.

Figure 9: Change in psychological functioning after puberty suppression with GnRH
[puberty blocker]

Source: Biggs, M. (2022). The Dutch protocol for juvenile transsexuals: Origins and evidence.
Journal of Sex &Marital Therapy, 49(4), 348-368. https://doi.org/10.1080/0092623x.2022.2121238.
Published with license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
NB: The bar shows the change in T-score from baseline; negative values indicate reduced problems. The line traces the
95% confidence interval. N=54 at Amsterdam, N=41 at London. Data reported from de Vries et al. (2011, Table 2) and
Carmichael et al. (2021).

71

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Research into routine practice
2.23 As highlighted in the interim report, in
2014 the number of referrals started to grow
exponentially in the UK with a higher number
of birth-registered females presenting in early
teenage years (Figure 10).

2.24 From 2014, puberty blockers moved from
a research-only protocol to being available
through routine clinical practice. In light of the
above findings, the rationale for this is unclear.

Figure 10: Sex ratio in children and adolescents referred to GIDS in the UK (2009-16)
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Adolescents F

15

48*

78*

141*

221*

314*

689*

1071*

Adolescents M

24

44*

41

77*

120*

185*

293*

426*

Children F

2

7

12

17

22

36

77*

138*

Children M

10

19

29

30

31

55*

103*

131

AFAB = Assigned female at birth
AMAB = Assigned male at birth

* Indicates p< .05 which shows a signiﬁcant increase of referrals compared to previous year
Source: Figure adapted from de Graaf, N. M., Giovanardi, G., Zitz, C., & Carmichael, P. (2018). Sex ratio in children
and adolescents referred to the Gender Identity Development Service in the UK (2009-2016). Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 47(5), 1301-1304. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-018-1204-9, with permission from Springer Nature.

72

Context

2.25 In addition, the strict inclusion criteria of
the Dutch protocol were no longer followed, and
puberty blockers were given to a wider range of
adolescents than would have met the inclusion
criteria in either the Dutch or UK studies.
These included patients with no history of
gender incongruence prior to puberty, as well
as those with neurodiversity and complex
mental health presentations.
2.26 On its establishment, NHS England took
on responsibility for commissioning services for
children and young people experiencing gender
dysphoria. Gender services for children and
young people is considered a highly specialised
service; these services for very rare and/or
complex conditions are usually provided to
no more than 500 patients a year. Because
of the small number of patients, the services
are provided in a limited number of hospitals
which enables the clinicians to maintain their
expertise.
2.27 In 2016, NHS England refreshed the
GIDS service specification, which sets out what
a healthcare provider needs to deliver (NHS
England, 2019). The Tavistock and Portman
NHS Foundation Trust was recontracted to
deliver the service.
2.28 The service specification described a
therapeutic service providing “psychological/
psychosocial support aimed at increasing the
wellbeing and resilience of the client” and
“therapeutic exploration of gender identity
development and gender expression, including
in relation to the client’s familial, social and
cultural situation” (NHS England, 2019).

2.29 The specification recognised that “the
research evidence around the long-term
impacts of some treatments is limited and
still developing and that by no means all
clients with [gender dysphoria] choose to
have physical interventions”. Recognising the
uncertainty, it set out that “hormone blockers
will be considered as an appropriate treatment
alongside psychological intervention” (NHS
England, 2019).
2.30 The specification allowed for referral of
“carefully selected clients who are at least
in Tanner Stage 2 of puberty and are up to
the age of 15” to the Paediatric Endocrine
Liaison Team’s Early Intervention’ Clinic. The
specification stated that “The Early Intervention
Clinic will continue to follow the Service’s 2011
research protocol, which following evaluation,
has now become established practice, with
the exception that hormone blockers will now
be considered for any children under the age
of 12 if they are in established puberty.” (NHS
England, 2019).
2.31 Clinical practice subsequently appears to
have deviated from the parameters set out in
the service specification which required that the
narrow criteria of the 2011 research protocol be
followed when considering medical intervention.
The adoption of a medical treatment with
uncertain risks, based on an unpublished trial
that did not demonstrate clear benefit, is a
departure from normal clinical practice.
2.32 This, in combination with the long delay in
publication of the results of the early intervention
study, is likely to have had an impact on patient
expectations of the benefits of the intervention
and subsequent demand for treatment.

73

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

2.33 The Review has been focused on future
service provision and did not have a remit to
explore in detail the factors contributing to the
situation that necessitated an independent review.
2.34 However, there are clearly lessons to be
learned by everyone in relation to how and why
the care of these children and young people
came to deviate from usual NHS practice, how
clinical practice became disconnected from the
clinical evidence base, and why warning signs
that the service delivery model was struggling
to meet demand were not acted on sooner.
2.35 One of the problems that has been exposed
is the governance of innovative clinical practice.
Whilst care cannot improve without innovation,
good clinical governance should require collection
of data and evidence with appropriate scrutiny to
prevent the incremental creep of new practices
without adequate oversight.

74

Context

3. Why this Review?
3.1 In January 2020, a Policy Working Group
(PWG) was established by NHS England to
undertake a review of the published evidence on
the use of puberty blockers and masculinising/
feminising hormones in children and young
people with gender dysphoria to inform a policy
position on their future use.
3.2 Given the increasingly evident polarisation
among clinical professionals, Dr Cass was asked
to chair the group as a senior clinician with no
prior involvement or fixed views in this area.

NHS England Policy Working
Group (PWG)
3.3 The PWG comprised:
• 2 senior members of the GIDS team
• 3 endocrinologists working in the linked
gender services
• 3 representatives with lived experience
• representatives from the Royal College of
Paediatrics and Child Health and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists
• an academic child psychiatrist
• a primary care academic
• an academic ethicist
NHS England staff:
• a public health consultant
• the national head of safeguarding
• the senior pharmacy lead
• relevant members of the specialised
commissioning team

3.4 NHS England uses a standardised protocol
for developing clinical policies (NHS England,
2020).The first step of this involves defining
the PICO (the Population being treated,
the Intervention, a Comparator treatment,
and the intended Outcomes). This of itself
was challenging, with a particular difficulty
being definition of the intended outcomes of
puberty blockers, and identification of suitable
comparators for both hormone interventions.
However, agreement was reached on
what should be included in the PICO and
subsequently the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) was commissioned
to review the published evidence, again
following a standardised protocol that has strict
criteria about the quality of studies that can be
included (NICE, 2020a; NICE, 2020b).

NICE evidence reviews
Puberty blockers (GnRH
analogues)
3.5 The key questions for this evidence review
were (NICE, 2020a):
• For children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria, what is the clinical effectiveness
of treatment with GnRH analogues
compared with one or a combination of
psychological support, social transitioning
to the desired gender or no intervention?
• For children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria, what is the short-term and longterm safety of GnRH analogues compared
with one or a combination of psychological
support, social transitioning to the desired
gender or no intervention?

75

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

3.6 The review of the evidence looked at nine
studies that met the inclusion criteria. A key
limitation of all the studies examined was the
lack of reliable comparative studies, as well
as of clear expected outcomes. All the studies
were small uncontrolled observational studies,
and all the results were of low certainty. Many
did not report statistical significance.
3.7 The studies that reported impact on gender
dysphoria, mental health, body image and
psychosocial impact were of very low certainty
and suggested little change from baseline
to follow-up. The studies that reported bone
density outcomes were similarly unreliable
so no safety outcomes could be confirmed.

Masculinising/feminising
hormones
3.8 The key questions for this evidence review
were (NICE, 2020b):
• In children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria, what is the clinical effectiveness
of treatment with gender-affirming hormones
compared with one or a combination of
psychological support, social transitioning
to the desired gender or no intervention?
• In children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria, what is the short-term and longterm safety of gender-affirming hormones
compared with one or a combination of
psychological support, social transitioning
to the desired gender or no intervention?
3.9 Ten uncontrolled observational studies met
the inclusion criteria. Again, the key limitation
to identifying the effectiveness and safety of
gender-affirming hormones for children and
adolescents with gender dysphoria was the lack
of reliable comparative studies.

76

3.10 The included studies had relatively short
follow-up, with an average duration of treatment
with gender-affirming hormones between
around 1 year and 5.8 years.
3.11 Results from five uncontrolled,
observational studies suggested that, in
children and adolescents with gender dysphoria,
gender-affirming hormones are likely to improve
symptoms of gender dysphoria, and may also
improve depression, anxiety, quality of life,
suicidality and psychosocial functioning. The
impact of treatment on body image was unclear.
3.12 Most studies included in this review did
not report comorbidities and no study reported
concurrent treatments in detail. Because of this
it is not clear whether any of the changes seen
were due to gender-affirming hormones or other
treatments the participants may have received.

Outcome of PWG and NICE
evidence reviews
3.13 The evidence produced by the NICE
reviews was inconclusive to the extent that
NHS England could not form a policy position
on the use of these medications.
3.14 It was clear that although the PWG and
NICE evidence reviews were an important step,
they did not give NHS England all the answers
needed.
3.15 At the same time, concerns about the
increasing numbers of gender-questioning
children and young people presenting to the NHS
were growing. There had also been questions
raised about the capacity of GIDS to manage
the caseload, as well as the clinical practice.

Context

Commissioning of the
Independent Review
3.16 The need for an independent review was
clear and driven by the changing situation over
the last 10-15 years:
• The exponential increase in the numbers of
children and young people presenting to the
NHS for help, outstripping the capacity of
services to support them. This had led to a
waiting list for specialist services in excess
of 2 years.
• The marked change in the case-mix,
from predominantly pre-pubertal birthregistered males to predominantly peri
or post-pubertal birth-registered females,
with no clear explanation for this changed
demographic.

• The introduction of earlier medical
intervention and the weakness of the
evidence underpinning the use of puberty
blockers (the ‘Dutch approach’) prior to
masculinising or feminising hormones at
age 16.
• The lack of long-term follow-up, and a
weak evidence base to support decision
making and development of a policy
position on appropriate care.
3.17 This independent Review was
commissioned to make recommendations
on models of care, appropriate treatment
approaches, audit, long-term follow-up and
research, as well as workforce requirements.
It was also asked to explore the reasons for
the increase in referrals and the change in
the demographics of the referred population.

77

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

4. Wider context
4.1 Since the Review was commissioned, there
have been a number of public policy initiatives
that, while outside the scope of the Review,
have nudged up against its work and may have
an effect on the support offered to young people
in the future.
4.2 These have led to increased public
attention on these issues, creating increasingly
hostile and polarised debate. Within this, the
Review and the children and young people at
its heart have at times been weaponised or
misrepresented to justify different positions.
4.3 On occasion the Review has been asked to
speak to teams developing these policy areas.
In such instances, the Review has provided
evidence-based information but has tried not to
step beyond the clinical focus of its remit.

Bell v Tavistock
4.4 In October 2019, a legal complaint was
lodged against GIDS. It raised concerns about
the adequacy of the consent procedures for
hormone treatment and described hormone
therapy as “experimental” (Bell v Tavistock)
([2020] EWHC 3274 (Admin)).
4.5 The case was based on whether the
processes whereby the complainant was
assessed and referred for hormone treatment
were adequate and lawful. The case was heard
as a Judicial Review, which focuses on the
lawfulness of a particular practice. The High
Court found that the processes were lawful.

78

4.6 The High Court considered that the
information that the child would need to
understand to have the requisite competence in
relation to puberty blockers, would be as follows
([2020] EWHC 3274 (Admin)):
• the immediate consequences of the
treatment in physical and psychological
terms;
• the fact that the vast majority of patients
taking puberty blockers go on to crosssex hormones and therefore that s/he is
on a pathway to much greater medical
interventions;
• the relationship between taking cross-sex
hormones and subsequent surgery, with the
implications of such surgery;
• the fact that cross-sex hormones may well
lead to a loss of fertility;
• the impact of cross-sex hormones on
sexual function;
• the impact that taking this step on this
treatment pathway may have on future and
life-long relationships;
• the unknown physical consequences of
taking puberty blockers; and
• the fact that the evidence base for this
treatment is as yet highly uncertain.

Context

4.7 Controversially they went on to conclude
that it would be “doubtful” that 14/15-yearolds have such competence, and “highly
unlikely” that children aged 13 or under have
competence.
4.8 This High Court decision was overruled on
appeal ([2021] EWCA 1363 (Civ)). The Court of
Appeal was critical of the High Court’s reliance
on contested evidence and of the age-based
guidelines for competence, given that the very
basis of Gillick is that the stage at which a child
can demonstrate competence in relation to a
decision about a particular medical intervention
is individual.
4.9 The Bell v Tavistock case points to the
contested nature of the evidence around the
factors listed above and the understanding
needed in order for a child or young person
to be able to consent to enter onto a hormone
pathway.
4.10 The ability of the child or young person to
lawfully consent to this proposed treatment is
only one issue. There are two other issues to
be addressed; the judgement that the clinician
makes as to whether a treatment is indicated
for a patient, and the information they provide
to them about the potential benefits, risks and
alternatives.

Care Quality Commission (CQC)
report
4.11 In October and November 2020, the
Care Quality Commission (CQC) inspectors
carried out an announced, focused inspection
of GIDS due to concerns reported to them by
healthcare professionals and the Children’s
Commissioner for England. Concerns related to
clinical practice, safeguarding procedures, and
assessments of patients’ ability to consent to
treatment.

4.12 The CQC report, published in January
2021 (CQC, 2021), gave the service an overall
rating of inadequate. The report noted the high
level of commitment and caring approach of
the staff but identified a series of issues that
needed improvement. In addition to the growing
waiting list pressures, the CQC identified
problems in several other areas including:
the assessment and management of risk;
the variations in clinical approach; the lack
of clarity and consistency of care plans; the
lack of any clear written rationale for decision
making in individual cases; and shortfalls in the
multidisciplinary mix required for some patient
groups. Recording of capacity, competency and
consent had improved since new procedures
were put in place in January 2020; however,
there remained a culture in which staff reported
feeling unable to raise concerns.
4.13 The CQC reported that when it inspected
GIDS, there did not appear to be a formalised
assessment process, or standard questions to
explore at each session, and it was not possible
to tell from the notes why an individual child
might have been referred to endocrinology
whilst another had not. Current GIDS data
demonstrate that a majority of children and
young people seen by the service do not get
referred for endocrine treatment, but there is no
clear information about what other diagnoses
they receive, and what help or support they
might need.
4.14 In response to both the original Bell v
Tavistock judgment and the CQC findings,
NHS England established a Multi-Professional
Review Group (MPRG). Its remit is to review
cases referred to the endocrinology clinic for
puberty blockers to determine whether the
agreed processes for assessment and informed
consent have been properly followed.

79

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

The outcome of the Bell Court of Appeal
decision did not change this requirement, given
the concerns raised by CQC regarding consent,
documentation and clarity about decision
making within the service.

Interim report and subsequent
developments
4.15 The Review has taken an iterative
approach and has provided advice at various
stages where there was sufficient clarity and
clinical agreement about the way forward. In
March 2022, the Review published an Interim
Report and has subsequently written to NHS
England in July 2022 (Appendix 6) and January
2023 (Appendix 7) setting out initial findings
and early advice.

The Cass
Review

Independent review
of gender identity
services for children
and young people:
Interim report
February 2022

80

4.16 In response, NHS England has begun to
implement changes to the clinical service offer
in parallel to the Review conducting its business.
This includes its decision to decommission
GIDS as part of a managed transition of the
service, initially to two new nationally networked
services (Phase 1 providers) based in specialist
children’s hospitals.
4.17 While it is positive that improvements
have already been made, it has added a layer
of complexity to the work of the Review as
the clinical landscape has shifted. This will be
described in more detail in Part 5 of this report.
4.18 This has inevitably meant that, alongside
establishing the longer-term vision for NHS
gender identity services for children and
young people, some of the Review’s focus
was redirected to ensure that the development
of these interim services focused on the
comprehensive, patient and family centred
service the Review has outlined.
4.19 It is against this ever-moving, often
turbulent backdrop and significant public,
political and media attention, that the Review
has been conducting its own programmes
of work.

Context

81

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Understanding
the patient cohort

82

Understanding the patient cohort

This part of the report sets out what is currently understood about the characteristics of
children and young people who are seeking NHS support for gender incongruence and/or
dysphoria and considers what may be driving the rise in prevalence and the change in
the case-mix.
Within its terms of reference (Appendix 1), the Review was asked to explore “the reasons for the
increase in referrals and why the increase has disproportionately been [birth-registered] females,
and the implications of these matters”.
This goes to the heart of some of the core controversies in this area, specifically the nature and
causes of gender incongruence and dysphoria, which then has bearing on the appropriate clinical
response.
A failure to consider the cause, potential influences and contributory factors can lead to people
taking polarised positions. Nuanced discussion is needed about how best to understand and
respond to the children and young people at the centre of the debate.

Explanatory Box 5:
Gender incongruence
A marked and persistent incongruence between an individual’s experienced gender
and the assigned sex (ICD-11).
Gender dysphoria
Clinically significant distress or impairment of function (DSM-5).

83

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

5. Changes in the patient profile
5.1 Throughout the lifetime of the Review, the
long waiting lists to access clinical services
have been a significant concern for the NHS,
and all those supporting this group of children
and young people. Child and Adolescent Mental
Health Services (CAMHS) and paediatric
services are stretched across the UK, but
as highlighted in the Review’s interim report,
gender-questioning children and young people
appear to be disproportionately disadvantaged
because they are frequently bypassed by
local services once on a waiting list for gender
services.
5.2 Understanding the numbers being referred
is not enough of a basis for the NHS to plan
gender services for children and young people.
Underlying the numbers is a group of young
people who often have a range of needs and/or
associated conditions. Any service design has
to take account of their holistic needs, not just
their gender identity.

Sources of information
5.3 Several sources of information were used to
understand the patient profile. These included:

• information from international colleagues
• discussions with a range of clinical staff
through roundtable events and one-to-one
meetings. The points represented are those
where there was consistency in clinical
perspective.
5.4 The systematic review (Taylor et al:
Patient characteristics) examined the numbers
of children and adolescents up to the age
of 18 referred to specialist NHS gender or
endocrinology services. It aimed to determine
whether the change in characteristics of the
population reported by various national clinics
was reflected in published evidence, and how
the population had changed over time.
5.5 In total, 131 papers met the inclusion criteria
for the systematic review. These covered a wide
international base but were primarily from North
America, Europe and Australia.
5.6 Information on demographics, genderrelated data, mental health, neurodevelopmental conditions and adverse
childhood experiences were collated from the
study papers.

5.7 Where comparable numeric data were
available between studies, these data were
combined to improve understanding. Where
• data from the Clinical Practice Research
numeric data were not available, the authors
Datalink (CPRD), a database of anonymised
described the findings of the research studies in
patient data from general practices across
a narrative form.
the UK
5.8 At the time of writing, the CPRD study has
• an audit of referral data to the Gender
reported preliminary findings on prevalence
Identity Development Service (GIDS),
of gender dysphoria, co-occurrence of
carried out by NHS Arden & GEM
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), anxiety and
Commissioning Support Unit
• a systematic review (Taylor et al: Patient
characteristics)

84

Understanding the patient cohort

depression. Data for 3,782 people with gender
dysphoria under the age of 18 were identified
by primary care and hospital care codes for the
study period 2009 to 2021. The full methodology
for the CPRD study can be found in Appendix
5, as well as the strengths and limitations of the
data. Only the incidence and prevalence data
are included in this report, pending release of
the fuller findings by the University of York on
completion of the study.

Demographics
UK data
5.9 From 2014 referral rates to GIDS began to
increase at an exponential rate, with the majority
of referrals being birth-registered females
presenting in early teenage years (Figure 11).

Figure 11: Child and Adolescent Referrals for Gender Dysphoria (UK, GIDS),
2010/11 to 2021/22

*Referral activity to GIDS/Tavistock was sharply limited in 2020-2021 due to COVID-19.
a Beginning in 2018-19, increasing numbers of referrals are not reported by birth registered sex.
b Limitations of the data: From the end of July 2021, AGEM CSU received referrals for GIDS from non-NHS sources
(GP, schools, local authority, voluntary sector). All NHS referrals into GIDS went directly to the Tavistock and Portman
GIDS. Data from the Tavistock and Portman GIDS website indicated that during 2021/22 they received in excess of
3000 referrals and further referrals received by AGEM CSU (approximately 1500 referrals) were not counted. Combined
this indicated that the GIDS received a total of approximately 5000 referrals in 2021/22 alone. When reviewing the data
that the GIDS provided against the number of referrals transferred into AGEM CSU as part of the waiting list transfer,
the CSU only received 3115 referrals that were “new”. This is significantly less than the number expected considering
that they reported that in 2021/22 there were over 5000 referrals received. It is difficult to know if the quoted, over
5000 referrals in 2021/22, is correct. There is a strong possibility that there was double counting during 2021/22 as the
referral numbers received by AGEM CSU were being reported to the GIDS who were then also sharing this information
with the Care Quality Commission.
AGEM CSU: Arden & GEM Commissioning Support Unit.

85

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

5.10 Figure 12 below shows referral data from
an audit of discharge notes of GIDS patients
discharged from the service between 1 April
2018 and 31 December 2022 (Appendix 8). The
youngest age of patients referred to GIDS was

3 years, the oldest age was 18 years and the
mean and median 14 years. Of these referrals,
73% were birth-registered females and 27%
birth-registered males.

Figure 12: Distribution of patient’s age on referral and birth registered gender on referral
to GIDS, 1 April 2018 to 31 December 2022

17+y

Female

Male

Age

15-16y
12-14y
11-12y
<10y
2000

1500

1000

500

Number of patients
Source: The Gender Identity Development Service Audit Report, Arden & GEM

86

0

500

Understanding the patient cohort

5.11 In the sample drawn from CPRD data
(Figures 13 & 14) (Appendix 5), recorded
prevalence of gender dysphoria in people aged
18 and under increased over 100-fold between
2009 and 2021. This increase occurred in two
phases; a gradual increase between 2009

and 2014, followed by an acceleration
from 2015 onwards. Increases in this
second phase were more rapid for people
registered as female, although clinical
records do not indicate whether their
recorded gender had been changed.

Figure 13: Incidence of recorded prevalence of gender dysphoria by age group

Source: Epidemiology and Outcomes for Children and Young People with Gender Dysphoria:
Retrospective Cohort Study Using Electronic Primary Care Records
NB: Shaded areas on prevalence graph denote 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 14: Incidence of recorded prevalence of gender dysphoria by registred gender

Source: Epidemiology and Outcomes for Children and Young People with Gender Dysphoria:
Retrospective Cohort Study Using Electronic Primary Care Records
NB: Shaded areas on prevalence graph denote 95% confidence intervals. Patients can request to have their recorded
gender changed on their clinical records without undergoing gender reassignment treatment, and CPRD reports the
latest recorded gender only.

87

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Comparison of UK and
international data
5.12 The systematic review (Taylor et al: Patient
characteristics) documented the increase in
referrals across 11 countries. Around 5-6 years

into each graph there is a sharp increase in
referrals. The inflection point for the increase
in referrals in the UK was in 2014, with similar
timing in several other countries. In the
Netherlands, the increase started from 2001,
with an inflection point in 2011.

Figure 15: Number of referrals over time by country

Source: Taylor et al: patient characteristics

88

Understanding the patient cohort

5.13 The first two graphs (Figure 15) show
absolute numbers of referrals, and the UK
appears to be an outlier with much larger
numbers of referrals. However, the third graph
is adjusted for the size of the 0-19 year old
population in each country (that is, numbers
per 100,000) and this brings the UK in line with
other countries.
5.14 Whereas in the early days of providing
gender services for children and young people,
the majority of referrals were pre-pubertal
children, between 2006 and 2013 both the
Canadian and Dutch gender clinics reported
that adolescent referrals had overtaken child
referrals (Aitken et al., 2015).
5.15 Multiple countries reported a gradual
switch in sex ratio towards a birth-registered
female prevalence. Further data from Canada
and the Netherlands showed that child referrals
of birth-registered males still outnumbered
those of birth-registered females, with the ratio
switching in adolescence.

5.17 The number of children and young people
referred to endocrine clinics has increased in
parallel to the numbers referred to gender clinics
(Figure 17). An international survey conducted
by the European Society of Paediatric
Endocrinology and Paediatric Endocrinology
Society in 2017 collated data over the preceding
three years from 25 centres across Europe, the
USA and South America (Skordis et al., 2019).
This represents the largest single international
pooled sample of referrals. Again, this shows an
increase in referrals beginning in 2014. Of this
group, 63% were transitioning from female to
male.
Figure 17: Numbers of referrals to
participating endocrine European
and U.S. centres, 2013-2016

5.16 Figure 16 from the Norwegian national
gender clinic demonstrates the divergence of
the birth-registered male/female curves, and a
transient fall off during the Covid-19 pandemic
(Anne Waehre, personal communication, 2023).
Figure 16: Referrals to the National
Gender Clinic for children and young
people in Norway

Source: Skordis, N., Butler, G., de Vries, M. C., Main, K.,
& Hannema, S. E. (2019). ESPE and PES International
Survey of Centers and Clinicians Delivering Specialist
Care for Children and Adolescents with Gender Dysphoria.
Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 90(5), 326 –331.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000496115
© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel

Source: Anne Wæhre, personal communication, 2023

89

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Gender characteristics
5.18 The systematic review (Taylor et al: Patient
characteristics) looked at four key features of
gender presentation: gender identity; formal
diagnosis; age at onset; and social transition.
Reporting of these characteristics was
inconsistently documented and highly variable.
Data on the percentage of children and young
people who had socially transitioned prior to
referral is discussed in Part 4.
5.19 Formal diagnosis of gender dysphoria was
reported in 65 studies, with proportions ranging
from 29% to 100%. The variable rates may be
because of the different criteria for referral to
the specialist gender clinics.
5.20 In most studies gender identity was not
specifically reported. Where it was, estimates
of non-binary identity ranged from 0-19%.
The UK census, capturing data on the UK
population over the age of 16, first enquired
about gender identity in 2021 (Office for
National Statistics, 2023a). Methodological
issues regarding terminology have raised
concerns about the validity of some of the
data (Office for National Statistics, 2023c).
However, the data is of interest in relation to
young people and adults identifying as nonbinary. The 16-to-24-year age-group had the
highest proportions of people who identified
as a transgender woman (0.15% or 9,000), as
a transgender man (0.22% or 14,000), and as
non-binary (0.26% or 17,000). The proportions
who identified with these categories then
decreased in each increasing age group.
5.21 The higher number of people who
identified as non-binary compared to those
who identified as a transgender woman
or transgender man is important in raising
awareness of the need to recognise and deliver

90

appropriate support for this group when they
present to the NHS. The census data are also
consistent with clinicians reporting seeing an
increasing number of non-binary young people.

Co-occurring conditions
5.22 In addition to the change in referral
numbers, sex ratio and gender identities, clinical
staff working in GIDS and other gender services
internationally have reported a change in the
case-mix. Adolescents in particular seem to
have more complex presentations, with greater
mental health and psychosocial needs, as well
as additional diagnoses of ASD and/or attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
5.23 The Review has spoken to clinicians
working in child and adolescent mental health
and in paediatric services. They report seeing
an increase in children and young people
presenting with issues around gender identity
alongside mental health difficulties, suggesting
young people are seeking and accessing care
across a broader range of NHS services.
5.24 An important aim of this Review is to find
ways to ensure that these children and young
people are able to get their needs met as
efficiently as possible, regardless of their point
of first contact so that they are not having to
navigate and negotiate multiple referrals.
5.25 A serious shortcoming of the literature
was that it was challenging to track changes
over time due to overlapping datasets, and
a lack of consistency in the reporting of key
characteristics of the population. This is a major
problem in trying to understand how the pattern
of co-occurring conditions has evolved, which
is key to understanding what approaches have
been put in place to help young people address
them and whether these delivered benefit to the
young person.

Understanding the patient cohort

Mental health needs
General mental health problems
5.26 Of the studies identified in the systematic
review (Taylor et al: Patient characteristics)
almost 50% reported data on depression and/or
anxiety, and close to 20% reported other mental
health issues. In short, rates of depression,
anxiety and eating disorders were higher in the
gender clinic referred population than in the
general population.
5.27 The following table gives synthesised
summary data on mental health where these
are available.
5.28 A study comparing Dutch and Canadian
gender clinic populations (de Vries et al., 2015)
found that mental health problems were more
common among them than in the general
population, but levels were similar to children
and young people referred to those in mental
health services for other non gender-related
problems.
5.29 The Dutch clinic cohort, where a puberty
blocker protocol was first introduced (the
Dutch protocol), was found to have a lower
incidence of associated problems compared

to the Canadian clinic cohort. Other studies
also demonstrated lower rates of mental
health problems in the population referred in
the Netherlands (de Vries, et al., 2011a) (only
approximately 33%) compared to the Finland
and the UK gender clinics.
5.30 In Finland (Kaltiala-Heino et al., 2015;
Karvonen et al., 2023) more than three-quarters
of the referred adolescent population needed
specialist child and adolescent psychiatric
support due to problems other than gender
dysphoria, many of which were severe, predated
and were not considered to be secondary to the
gender dysphoria.
5.31 A more recent paper from Finland (Kaltiala
et al., 2023) looked at whether the mental health
needs of children and young people referred to
gender services had changed in combination
with the increase referral rate. This found that
the gender dysphoria group had much greater
mental health needs than age matched peers,
and that those presenting more recently (20162019) had greater needs than those presenting
in earlier cohorts (1996-2000). This appears
to be the only paper which has systematically
reported on changes over time in mental health
needs.

Table 2: Synthesised data on mental health diagnoses in gender clinic referred population
DIAGNOSIS

COUNTRIES
INCLUDED

DATE RANGE

% REFERRED CYP

95% CI

RANGE (%)

2-8

0-23

Eating disorders

8

1998-2019

5

Depression

13

1980-2021

38

31-45

3-78

Anxiety

13

1980-2021

38

31-46

8-100

Source: Taylor et al: Patient characteristics
NB: A patient population (country) may have had multiple study reports over time. In which case, data, from the study
over the longest time period or that was most representative of the population was selected.
CYP: Children and young people; CI: confidence interval.

91

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Specialist mental health conditions

5.36 Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is
another condition for which there has been an
5.32 The Review held a series of discussions
increase in presentations of young people. It
with clinicians seeing children and young
is one of the obsessive-compulsive disorders
people with conditions usually referred to
(OCD), where there is a preoccupation with
specialist services, for example, clinicians
body image and with compulsive revisiting or
working in: specialist clinics for children with
avoidance of thoughts to manage distress. A
body dysmorphic disorder; specialist eating
recent study using population data (Krebs et
disorder services; and services for children
al., 2024) found that BDD is more common
with tics. A common factor with many of these
specialist conditions is that they can occur when in females than males (prevalence of 1.8%
a person’s mental stress or distress shows itself versus 0.3%), and that adolescent girls are at
highest risk with an estimated prevalence of
through physical symptoms, such as pain, tics,
neurological symptoms or other problems which 3.4%. The condition is relatively rare before
puberty. Many patients were found to be on the
affect their ability to function.
autistic spectrum and 80% of patients with BDD
5.33 The consultants and psychologists working included in the study had suicidal ideation.
in these services described young people
presenting with these conditions in combination 5.37 BDD is often underdiagnosed or
misdiagnosed - young people do not access
with gender-questioning or gender-related
mental health services because they feel that
distress.
their concerns about their appearance may
5.34 One example is functional movement
be dismissed. However, there are improved
disorders, particularly functional tic-like
treatment outcomes for young people who have
behaviours (FTLB). Classic neurodevelopmental profound distress from BDD, with exposuretics usually start in childhood and if they last
based cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT),
longer than a year a child could be diagnosed
sometimes combined with medication (Rautio
with Tourette’s syndrome; of those diagnosed,
et al., 2022).
around 70-80% are boys. In contrast, “FTLB
5.38 Clinicians have described to the Review
are typically found to occur in young females,
how in patients with BDD, the intense focus
with complex, disabling and tic-lookalike
on appearance is most commonly on facial
patterns, usually triggered by exposure to
features, but that some experience distress
videos portraying tic-like behaviours on social
media”. FTLB are associated with high levels of about genitalia or breasts. In this situation it can
be difficult to determine whether the distress
depression and anxiety (Nilles et al., 2022).
is due to BDD or gender dysphoria. However,
5.35 The association between FTLB and
at the end of a treatment package for BDD
gender diversity described by clinical staff
some young people say they no longer feel
is reported in the literature, with one study
ill at ease with their birth-registered gender,
(Martino et al., 2023) reporting that 41% of
while some may have less distress about their
patients with functional tics had a gender
genitalia or breasts but still have marked gender
minority identity, and the gender minority group
incongruence and proceed to a social
also had significantly higher rates of anxiety,
or medical gender transition.
depression, social phobia and social interaction
anxiety.

92

Understanding the patient cohort

5.39 The distressing symptoms that occur in
these ‘body and mind’ conditions are real, and
like pain or discomfort that arises from other
causes can be addressed and helped with
psychological interventions. It is very important
that gender-questioning young people are able
to access these evidence-based treatments
alongside any other clinically appropriate
interventions to support their gender care.

Neurodiversity
5.40 Table 3 shows synthesised summary
data on prevalence of ASD and ADHD where
this was available in the papers included in the
systematic review.
5.41 Some research studies have suggested
that transgender and gender-diverse individuals
are three to six times more likely to be autistic
than cisgender individuals, after controlling for
age and educational attainment (Warrier et al.,
2020).

5.42 These findings are echoed by clinicians
who report seeing teenage girls who have
good cognitive ability and are articulate, but are
struggling with gender identity, suicidal ideation
and self-harm. In some of these young people
the common denominator is undiagnosed
autism, which is often missed in adolescent
girls. Others may go on to receive a diagnosis
of emotionally unstable personality disorder
(EUPD) when they enter adult services.
5.43 Despite often being highly articulate,
intelligent and skilled in many areas, autistic
young people have difficulties with social
communication and peer relationships, which
may make it difficult for them to feel accepted
and ‘fit in’.
5.44 Difficulties with interoception (making
sense of what is going on in their bodies) and
alexithymia (recognising and expressing their
emotions) can sometimes make it hard for these
young people to express how they are feeling
about their internal sensations, their gender
identity and their sexual identity.

Table 3: Synthesised data on neurodiversity in the gender clinic referred population
DIAGNOSIS

COUNTRIES
INCLUDED

DATE RANGE

% REFERRED CYP

95% CI

RANGE (%)

ASD

9

1998-2019

9

6-11

0-26

ADHD

9

1998-2021

10

7-13

2.5-27

Source: Taylor et al: Patient characteristics
NB: A patient population (country) may have had multiple study reports over time. In which case, data,
from the study over the longest time period or that was most representative of the population was selected.
CYP: Children and young people; CI: Confidence interval.

93

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

5.45 In addition, mental health disorders
including anxiety, depression, eating disorders,
functional neurological disorder, OCD and BDD
are more common in autistic children and young
people (González-Herrero et al., 2022; Lai et al.,
2019).
5.46 Mind and body understanding and
integration are dependent on an individual
child/young person’s chronological age,
developmental level and the presence or
absence of neurodevelopmental differences.
These factors may mean that these individuals
identify and communicate experiences of stress/
distress differently from other neurotypical
individuals.
5.47 Working this out may take longer than
it does for neurotypical individuals, making
neurodiverse young people potentially vulnerable
into their early 20s or longer because of their
tendency to want black and white answers, and
their difficulty in tolerating uncertainty.

Adverse childhood experiences
5.48 The systematic review (Taylor et al:
Patient characteristics) highlighted the fact
that relatively few studies reported on adverse
childhood experiences (ACEs), but those that
did demonstrated high rates amongst children
and young people referred to gender services
(ranges given below):

• death or permanent hospitalisation of parent
(8-19%)
• loss of parent through abandonment
resulting in adoption (1-8%), foster care
(1-12%) or children’s home placement
(0.5 - 5%).
5.49 While the high numbers of ACEs reported
in the systematic review are notable, as
relatively few studies have documented ACEs,
it is not possible to determine how the number
has varied over time.
5.50 However, a review of the first 124 cases
seen by GIDS (Di Ceglie et al., 2002) found
that just over a quarter of all referrals had spent
some time in care and nearly half of all referrals
had experienced living with only one parent.
It showed that 42% of the children covered by
the audit experienced the loss of one or both
parents, mainly through separation; 38% had
family physical health problems; and 38% had
family mental health problems. Physical abuse
was documented in 15% of cases.
5.51 This suggests that regardless of the
change in demographics, ACEs and broader
adversity within the family unit are important
issues to be aware of when assessing young
people’s needs and planning a support package
for them.

• combined neglect or abuse (11-67%)

Suicidality and death by suicide

• physical abuse (15-20%)

5.52 There is considerable concern about
the risk of death by suicide among gender
diverse youth and debate about whether
gender-affirming treatments reduce this
risk. This section discusses what is known
about suicidality and the risk of suicide in this
population and Chapter 15 discusses what
is known about whether gender-affirming
treatments reduce that risk.

• sexual abuse (5-19%)
• emotional abuse (14%)
• maternal mental illness or substance abuse
(53% and 49%)
• paternal mental illness or substance abuse
(38%)

94

• exposure to domestic violence (23-25%)

Understanding the patient cohort

5.53 Suicide is the act of taking one’s own life
voluntarily and intentionally, whilst suicidality
encompasses suicidal thoughts (sometimes
called suicidal ideation), suicide plans and
suicide attempts.

study compared rates of suicidality in the gender
clinic referred population with standardised data
from the general adolescent population and
non-trans identified youth referred to child and
adolescent mental health services.

5.54 Understanding the factors that can put
young gender-questioning people at risk is
of crucial importance to the young people
themselves, their families and the clinical staff
looking after them. Balanced information,
which is realistic and practical, and does not
over-exaggerate or underestimate the risks,
is essential to support everyone involved and
identify young people in most urgent need of
help.

5.57 There was variation between clinics,
but across the three clinics, rates of suicidality
ranged from 27% to 55%. These rates of
suicidality were significantly higher than for
the general adolescent population, but similar
to non-trans identified youth referred to child
and adolescent mental health services. Higher
rates of suicidality were observed in birthregistered females, as is the case in the general
adolescent population.

5.55 Table 4 gives synthesised summary data
on suicide attempts, self-harm and suicidal
ideation where this was available. The majority
of studies that separated self-harm or suicidality
by birth-registered sex found higher rates in
birth-registered females versus males.

5.58 The same paper (de Graaf et al., 2020)
reviewed 17 previous studies that had reported
rates of suicidal ideation ranging from 17%
to 87%, and of suicide attempts ranging from
12% to 54%. The wide range reflects different
methodologies and gender clinic populations.

5.56 A large study (de Graff et al., 2020)
examined rates of suicidality across Canadian,
UK and Dutch gender clinic cohorts, generating
2,771 youth in the sample. Suicidality
was assessed using two questions from
standardised scales. Carers and young people
were asked to rate ‘now or within past 6 months’
in response to: carers - “Deliberately harms self
or attempts suicide”, “Talks about killing self”;
and young people - “I deliberately try to hurt or
kill myself”, “I think about killing myself”. The

Deaths by suicide
5.59 Deaths by suicide in children and young
people are relatively rare events, compared
to adult suicide. However, each one is a tragic
event. In the UK, the death of every child
and young person under 18 is reviewed and
information about causation is collected by the
National Child Mortality Database (NCMD).

Table 4: Synthesised data on suicide attempts, self-harm and suicidal ideation in the
gender clinic referred population
DIAGNOSIS

COUNTRIES
INCLUDED

DATE RANGE

% REFERRED CYP

95% CI

RANGE (%)

Suicide attempts

11

1976-2021

14

11-17

9-30

Self-harm

11

1976-2021

29

23-25

8-56

Suicidal ideation

10

2002-2021

39

30-48

10-87

Source: Taylor et al: Patient characteristics
NB. A patient population (country) may have had multiple study reports over time. In which case, data,
from the study over the longest time period or that was most representative of the population was selected.
CYP: Children and young people CI: Confidence interval.

95

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

5.60 The latest NCMD report on suicide in
children and young people (NCMD, 2021)
looked at deaths between 1 April 2019 and 31
March 2020. There were 108 deaths that were
assessed as highly or moderately likely to be
due to suicide (about 2 deaths per week of
under 17-year olds). The overall suicide rate in
England was 1.8 per 100,000 9-17-year olds.

transsexual, or non-binary but we acknowledge
that the terms people use to describe their
own identity can be dynamic and we will be
monitoring this in future reports”. The report
stated that 13 of the 37 were under 25. A high
proportion of these individuals had experienced
childhood abuse. Self-harm and personality
disorder diagnosis were common in this group.

5.61 The Child Death Overview Panel
reviewed 91 of the cases (NCMD, 2021).
They examined a range of background factors
which included household functioning (for
example, family members with a medical
or mental health problem, domestic abuse,
divorce or parental separation), mental health
needs, neurodevelopmental conditions, sexual
orientation, sexual identity and gender identity,
abuse and neglect, bullying, problems in school,
social media use, and drug or alcohol use.

5.65 The Review met with The Tavistock and
Portman NHS Foundation Trust to discuss
deaths of patients (where known) who had been
referred to or were currently or previously under
the care of GIDS. The patients who died by
suicide between 2018 and 2023 were described
as presenting with multiple comorbidities and/
or complex backgrounds. In addition, the trust
observed that risk of suicidality was heightened
at transition points in patient care; for example,
between child and adult services. The young
people were more likely to be registered female
at birth, identifying as male in adolescence.

5.62 Household functioning was found to be
the most common factor - 63 (69%) of deaths,
with mental health needs in 50 (55%), bullying in
21 (23%), neurodevelopmental conditions in 15
(16%) and sexual orientation, sexual identity and
gender identity in 8 (9%).
5.63 Of the children or young people, 81 (89%)
had more than one recorded factor and 51
(56%) had factors in five or more categories.
Over one-third (33, 36%) had never been in
contact with mental health services.
5.64 Another source of data in the UK is the
National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and
Safety in Mental Health (2023). This looked at
all-age suicide in people already under the care
of mental health services. Between 2016-2020,
there were 223 deaths by suicide of patients
who identified as lesbian, gay or bisexual
and 37 patients that the report described as
“within a trans group” in the UK. They qualified
this by explaining that “we are using “trans”
as an umbrella term to include transgender,

96

5.66 Looking to international data, a recent
study in Finland (Ruuska et al., 2024) reviewed
all gender clinic referred adolescents between
1996 and 2019 (2,083) and compared them to
age-matched controls (16,643). There were 55
deaths in the study population, of which 20 were
deaths by suicide. Although the suicide rate in
the gender-referred youth was higher than in the
general population, this difference levelled out
when specialist-level mental health treatment
was taken into account. Overall, it is difficult to
draw firm conclusions because the absolute risk
of suicide in the population of gender dysphoric
youth and in the control population was very
low, so numbers were thankfully small.

Understanding the patient cohort

5.67 Although the data suggest that the
numbers of deaths by suicide in this group
of young people is very low, every death of a
children or young people is a tragedy and a
devastating loss. In each case, there is a strong
need to understand what happened and why, so
that anything that can be done to prevent future
deaths is identified and acted upon.

Changes in the patient profile
5.68 The systematic review (Taylor et al:
Patient characteristics) documented the rapid
increase in referrals across many countries
and concluded “These children show higher
than expected levels of ASD, ADHD, anxiety,
depression, eating disorders, suicidality, selfharm, and ACEs. Agreement on the core
characteristics data to be collected at referral/
assessment would help to ensure studies
measure key outcomes and enable services
to develop to meet the needs of these children.
Services need to assess and respond to any
co-occurring needs and complexities”.
5.69 Today’s population is different from that
for which clinical practice was developed
with a higher proportion of birth-registered
females presenting in adolescence. They are
a heterogenous group with wide-ranging cooccurring conditions, often including complex
needs. This needs to be reflected in the
services offered by the NHS.

97

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

6. Developmental considerations
for children and adolescents
6.1 Two particularly critical periods of
development are early childhood and
adolescence. It is very important to understand
several aspects of typical development - from
what happens before birth through early
childhood to adolescence, as well as the range
of normal variations.
6.2 This has bearing on what might happen
when clinical interventions are used and on the
different issues involved in considering gender
care for children and young people compared to
that for older adults.
6.3 The issues covered in this section have
relevance for:
• understanding what is known about the
biology of gender incongruence.
• understanding about mental health
vulnerability.
• considerations for social transition
(see Chapter 12).
• potential impacts of puberty blockers
(see Chapter 14).
• potential impacts of masculinising/
feminising hormones (see Chapter 15).
• obtaining consent (See Chapter 16).

Gender development through
childhood and adolescence
6.4 Biological sex is determined by sex
chromosomes. Males have an X and Y
chromosome (XY) and females have two X
chromosomes (XX). In early pregnancy, all
foetuses have the potential to become male or
female. A gene on the Y chromosome drives
production of testosterone, which is necessary
to produce internal and external male genitalia.
In the absence of testosterone, the foetus will
develop female anatomy.
6.5 There are many biological differences
between males and females; for example,
height, muscular strength, life expectancy, as
well as susceptibility to certain illnesses such
as lung cancer or heart disease. There are also
very large overlaps between characteristics.
6.6 Academics have identified three important
ways in which sex differences are expressed
(Babu & Shah, 2021):
• gender role behaviours (these are
behaviours such as toy preferences, play,
physicality)
• gender identity (an innate sense of
belonging and self-identification of one’s
gender as male, female or an alternative
gender)
• and later, sexual orientation (the sex of
the individuals to whom one is sexually
attracted).
6.7 It is thought that all three of these can be
influenced by biological and social factors, and
this is an evolving area of research.

98

Understanding the patient cohort

6.8 Figure 18 summarises these characteristic
sex differences in humans. The use of the
terms ‘boys’ toys’ and ‘girls’ toys’ by the author
may feel uncomfortable but it is a classification
that is used in academic study. The ﬁgure also

illustrates the size of the sex difference in adult
human height. Height is included to provide a
familiar comparator for contextualising the sizes
of the behavioural/psychological sex differences
(Hines, 2020a).

Figure 18: Illustration of the overlap in distributions of scores for males and females
for psychological/behavioural characteristics that show large and reliable sex differences
Female
Identification with male gender

Interest in male sexual partners

Gender role behaviour

Interest in boys’ toys

Interest in girls’ toys

Number of people

Number of people

Number of people

Height

Male

Source: Adapted from Hines, M. (2020). Human gender development. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
118, 89-96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.018, with permission from Elsevier.
NB: Higher scores for gender role behaviour represent more male-typical behaviour. The overlap for height is included
as a familiar comparison.

99

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

6.9 In the UK, the average male is 5’9” tall and
the average female 5’4”. Some females are taller
than some males, and this is part of normal
variation. It would be very difficult to guess
whether a 5’7” person was male or female from
their height alone, because this falls right in the
middle of the overlap.

Development of gender role
behaviours

6.10 Societal expectations and stereotypes
have driven the idea that gender role
behaviours, gender identity and sexuality
should all align with birth-registered sex. This is
not always the case. Gender role behaviours,
gender identity and sexuality can vary
independently of each other.

6.15 Differences in gender role behaviours are
apparent in pre-school, when children start to
show gender stereotyped behaviour in their
play. Around this time, they seek to play with
same-sex peers.

6.11 Females are most commonly attracted to
male partners, and vice versa, but there is an
overlap between males and females, with some
individuals being same-sex attracted, attracted
to both sexes, neither sex, or more fluid in their
sexual preferences.
6.12 Children’s sense of gender identity most
commonly aligns with their birth-registered sex,
but there is considerable variability in the rate at
which they develop gender constancy, and the
expression of their gender identity.
6.13 Some children will have gender role
behaviours that do not align strongly with their
birth-registered sex, but a gender identity
that does align. They may grow up to be
heterosexual or same-sex attracted.

100

6.14 Like other areas of development, gender
identity and gender role behaviours have typical
milestones (de Vries et al., 2013; deMayo et al.,
2022).

6.16 Toy choice has been extensively studied.
Researchers classify toys into those that are
typically preferred by boys (for example, cars
and trucks) and those that are typically preferred
by girls (for example, dolls). A systematic review
(Davis & Hines, 2020) demonstrated that these
differences in toy choice are very large.
6.17 Like biological characteristics such as
height, there is a large overlap in gender role
behaviours. This variability in gender role
expression exists from an early age (some
girls exhibit behaviours that are traditionally
perceived as more masculine, and some boys
exhibit behaviours that are perceived as more
feminine).
6.18 A common assumption is that toy choice
and other gender role behaviours are solely
a result of social influences; for example, that
boys will only be given trucks and girls will
only be given dolls to play with. Although this
is partially true, there is evidence for prenatal
and postnatal hormonal influence on these
behaviours, which will be discussed later.

Understanding the patient cohort

Development of gender identity
6.19 In 1966, Kohlberg set out a theory of
gender identity development (Kohlberg,
1966). Kohlberg’s theory describes the typical
progression of children acquiring gender identity
(realising they are boys or girls) at 2-3 years old,
acquiring gender stability (realising that gender
does not change) at 3-4 years, and acquiring
gender constancy (realising that superficial
indicators such as clothes do not change
gender) at 5-6 years.
6.20 Modern childhood experiences are
different from when Kohlberg was writing, and
contemporary research is needed to better
understand and examine these fundamental
principles, as well as the influence of early
childhood experiences on gender identity
development.

Interaction of nature and nurture
6.21 Sex differences in the brain emerge in
the second half of pregnancy. There is strong
evidence from animal studies that these
changes are driven by the presence or absence
of testosterone and have a long-term effect on
sex-typed development (Bakker, 2014).
6.22 All three of the human characteristics
that show particularly large sex differences
(childhood sex-typed play, sexual orientation
and gender identity) have been found to relate
to early testosterone exposure.
6.23 Sex-typed play has been studied more
extensively than any other human behaviour
in this context, and at least 10 independent
research groups have reported a link to prenatal
testosterone exposure (Hines, 2015).
6.24 Much of this work is based on children
who are born with atypical sex hormone levels.
These conditions are called differences in sex
development (DSD), previously termed intersex.

6.25 The most commonly studied DSD is
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). In this
condition, genetic females (XX) usually have
high levels of testosterone caused by changes
in their genes. These high testosterone
levels start antenatally, and result in partially
masculinised genitalia (Babu & Shah, 2021).
6.26 Genetic females (XX) with CAH are
usually reared as females as they have female
internal organs with reproductive capacity,
yet they are more likely than other females
to have male role behaviours (for example,
male-type play and toy choice), and reduced
female-typical play. In adulthood, 50-75% will be
exclusively heterosexual, whilst the remainder
will be bisexual or same-sex attracted. Only
2-5% will have gender dysphoria that leads to
gender reassignment; however, some will have
a weaker female identity (Berenbaum & Beltz,
2011). Therefore, it appears that in CAH, while
prenatal testosterone exposure has a strong
impact on gender role behaviour, gender identity
predominantly aligns with sex of rearing.
6.27 Similarly, genetic males (XY) with
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
(CAIS) have functioning testes but their cells
are unable to respond to testosterone, and
they show female-typical play patterns (Hines,
2020a).
6.28 A more unpredictable situation is when
genetic males (XY) are born with a range of
conditions where they have normal testosterone
levels but have a very deformed or absent
penis. If these children are raised as girls, the
majority will continue to identify as female,
despite their normal male hormone levels
(Meyer-Bahlburg, 2005).
6.29 There are numerous other forms of
DSD. Practice has changed from the earlier
era management approach of early surgical
modification to match an individual’s assigned
sex. Now the emphasis is on assessing the

101

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

infant’s biology and using that to predict the
most likely developmental outcomes with
which to guide sex of rearing. This approach
makes it less likely that irreversible surgery
or medical intervention will be given before
the individual is able to understand their body
(and its capabilities), and their psychosexual
development is advanced.

6.34 An understanding of brain development
and the stages of adolescence is essential
in understanding how gender identity relates
to the other aspects of adolescence. It is
also important to consider in relation to the
management of gender incongruence and
gender-related distress during this period.

6.30 An important finding is that some DSD
conditions have more predictable gender
identity outcomes. In other DSD conditions,
long-term predictions are less reliable, and
in those cases sex of rearing seems to be a
stronger predictor of gender identity in childhood
and beyond.

Changes in the brain during
adolescence

6.31 In summary, studies of children with DSD
suggest that a complex interplay between
testosterone levels, external genitalia, sex
of rearing and socio-cultural environment all
play a part in eventual gender identity. This is
important to consider when trying to understand
the range of pathways that might lead to gender
incongruence.

Changes from adolescence
into adulthood
6.32 There are two important periods of brain
development - the first up to age three, and the
second from adolescence into adulthood.
6.33 Adolescence is a period of rapid social,
emotional, physical and cognitive development
that can be difficult for some young people to
navigate. Pubertal changes in hormones result
in changes to the physical body and the brain,
alongside major changes in social expectations
and demands.

102

6.35 Starting in early puberty unused neural
connections are pruned, and other important
connections are made stronger and faster.
6.36 It used to be thought that brain maturation
finished in adolescence, but it is now
understood that this remodelling continues into
the mid-20s as different parts become more
interconnected and specialised (Giedd, 2016).
6.37 This brain remodelling does not proceed
evenly. Changes in the limbic area, which
is ‘present-orientated’ and concerned with
risk taking and sensation seeking, begin
with puberty; this part of the brain becomes
super sensitised, drives emotional volatility,
pleasure and novelty seeking, and also makes
adolescents more sensitive to social rejection,
as well as vulnerable to addiction and a range
of mental health problems.
6.38 The ‘future orientated’ prefrontal cortex
matures later, with development continuing
into an individual’s 20s, and as illustrated in
Figure 19, is concerned with executive functions
such as complex decision making, rational
judgement, inhibition of impulsivity, planning
and prioritisation.

Understanding the patient cohort

Figure 19:6.
Maturation
of the adolescent
brain
Maturation
of the Adolescent
Brain

Shifting and
adjusting
behaviour when
situations
change

Simultaneously
considering multiple
streams of information
when faced with
complex and
challenging situations

Ability to
balance
short-term
rewards with
long-term goals

Modulation
of intense
emotions

Organising
thoughts
and problem
solving

Foreseeing
and weighing
possible
consequences
of behaviour

Inhibiting
inappropriate
behaviour
and initiating
appropriate
behaviour

Considering
future and
making
predictions

Impulse
control and
delaying
gratification

Focusing
attention

Forming
strategies
and planning

Prefrontal
Cortex
Neuropsychiatric Disease & Treatment 2013:9 449-461 - Originally published by,
adapted and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

103

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

6.39 By the age of 15 an adolescent will make
similar decisions in relation to hypothetical
situations as an adult. However, although
adolescents can balance the possible harm or
benefit of different courses of action in theory,
in the real world they may still engage in
dangerous behaviours, despite understanding
the risks involved. Hence, both the role of
emotions and the connection between feeling
and thinking are relevant to how adolescents
make decisions (Arain et al., 2013).

The ‘social brain’
6.40 The ‘social brain’ is the network of brain
regions that are involved in understanding other
people’s intentions, desires and beliefs. The
slowly maturing prefrontal cortex is a key part of
this network, so there are considerable changes
in these abilities through teens to adulthood.
6.41 Through adolescence, peers have an
increasing influence and parents a lessening
influence. Adolescents’ evaluation of their social
and personal worth is strongly influenced by
what their peers think about them. Studies
have shown adolescents to be hypersensitive
to social isolation, so much so that going along
with peers in order to avoid social risk, even if
it means taking health and legal risks, might be
seen as the rational choice because it reduces
the possibility of social exclusion (Blakemore,
2018).

104

Role of sex hormones in brain
maturation
6.42 There is increasing evidence that the
changes in brain maturation described above
are driven by a combination of chronological
age and sex hormones released through
puberty (Goddings et al., 2019; Ravindranath et
al., 2022; Sisk & Zehr, 2005). Sex hormones are
also responsible for increasing divergence in the
structure of the male and female brain (Beck et
al., 2003).
6.43 Some researchers have suggested there
may be a ‘critical period’ in adolescence for
the development of more complex thinking and
analytical processes (Baxendale, 2024; Larsen
& Luna, 2018), and more work is needed to
clarify this.
6.44 In summary, childhood, adolescence and
young adulthood are dynamic developmental
periods for gender expression, cognitive
development and overall brain maturation, and
at the same time, young people are having to
navigate an increasingly complex world. This
important developmental backdrop needs to
be taken into account when thinking about how
gender incongruence may develop in any one
individual and how best to address it.

Understanding the patient cohort

105

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

7. Growing up in the 2000s
7.1 A generation is a group of people who
share similar birth years, life experiences and
cultural influences. Every generation encounters
new experiences, advances, technologies,
challenges and stressors that have a profound
effect on their behaviours, attitudes and beliefs.
7.2 It may appear somewhat simplistic to
divide people by birth year, but this is a helpful
way of understanding how perspectives, as
well as health and illness, can be shaped by
major world events (most recently the Covid-19
pandemic), as well as social and economic
conditions.
7.3 Generation Z is the generation in which the
numbers seeking support from the NHS around
their gender identity have increased, so it is
important to have some understanding of their
experiences and influences.
7.4 They are defined as those who were born
between 1995 and 2009 and are characterised
by their digital nativism (proficiency in using
technology and social media) and unique
characteristics such as being entrepreneurial,
socially conscious, pragmatic and diverse
(Jayatissa, 2023).
7.5 In terms of broader context, Generation Z
and Generation Alpha (those born since 2010)
have grown up through a global recession,
concerns about climate change, and most recently
the Covid-19 pandemic. Global connectivity has
meant that as well the advantages of international
peer networks, they are much more exposed to
worries about global threats.

106

Generational beliefs
and gender identity
7.6 Generation Z and some younger Millennials
(Generation Y) generally have different beliefs
about the fluidity and mutability of gender than
older generations. Attitudes have changed
at speed, such that within a 6-month period
between early 2020 and late 2020/early 2021
Generation Z adults surveyed in the USA
became the first generation in which the
majority responded negatively to the statement
“there are only two genders, male and female”
(Twenge, 2023).
7.7 There are also generational differences
in the numbers of young adults reporting that
their experienced gender does not align with
their birth-registered sex. Based on US Census
data, in 2021-2022, 5.6% of Generation Z
adults identified as transgender or non-binary,
compared to 2.4% of Millennials and 1.5% of
Generation X.

Understanding the patient cohort

Figure 20: Percentage of U.S. adults who believe there are more than two genders,
by generation 2019-2021
Late 2019

Late 2020 - Early 2021

Early 2020

51%

50
39%
31% 31%

33%

33%
29% 29%

30%

33%

41%

35%

25

0

Boomers

Gen X

Millennials

Gen Z

Source: Adapted from Twenge, J. M. (2023). Generations: The
real differences between gen Z, millennials, gen X,
Year
boomers, and silents - and what they mean for America’s future. Atria Books.
NB: Shows percent who disagree with the statement “There are only two genders, male and female.” Late 2019 data
were collected July 18 to December 26; early 2020 data were collected January 2 to June 25; late 2020-early 2021 data
were collected July 2, 2020 to January 12, 2021.

Figure 21: Percent of U.S. adults identifying
as transgender, by sex assigned at birth
and generation, 2021-2022
Male to Female

Figure 22: Percent of U.S. adults identifying
as nonbinary, by sex assigned at birth and
generation, 2021-2022
Generation Z (Born 1995-2012)

Female to Male

Male (AMAB)

3.5

2.5

3

2

2.5

1.5

2
1.5

1

1

0.5
0

Female (AFAB)

4

3

0.5

Boomers

Gen X

Millennials

Gen Z

0

Boomers

Gen X

Millennials

Gen Z

Source: Adapted from Twenge, J. M. (2023). Generations:
The real differences between gen Z, millennials, gen X,
boomers, and silents - and what they mean for America’s
future. Atria Books.

Source: Adapted from Twenge, J. M. (2023). Generations:
The real differences between gen Z, millennials, gen X,
boomers, and silents - and what they mean for America’s
future. Atria Books.

NB: Data collected between July 21, 2021, and October
17, 2022. Terms are from the BRFSS survey, although they
are increasingly considered outdated and are replaced
with transgender women and transgender
men, respectively.

NB: Data collected between July 21, 2021 and October 17,
2022. AMAB = assigned male at birth; AFAB = assigned
female at birth.

107

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

7.8 In common with other trends documented
internationally, the 2022 UK census (Office
for National Statistics, 2023a) reported that
the group with the highest percentage (1.16%)
identifying as transgender (defined as gender
different from that registered at birth) was birthregistered females aged 16-24. This was the
only age group in which the number of birthregistered females identifying as trans exceeded
the number of birth-registered males identifying
as trans.
7.9 Changes in beliefs about gender identity in
Generation Z have led to much more flexible
thinking about how gender is expressed, and

a move away from gender stereotypes. Young
people within Generation Z, as well as younger
Millennials, are much more open to experiment
with gender expression than previous
generations.
7.10 Many of these young people will not
require any input from the NHS. They may see
themselves as being anywhere on a spectrum
from gender non-conforming through to binary
trans. Many will remain fluid in their gender
identity for an extended period. Some will
partially or fully socially transition, but not
seek medical intervention.

Figure 23: Percentage of usual residents aged 16 years and over who identified as trans
by sex and age, England and Wales, 2021
People who answered female to the sex question
People who answered male to the sex question

1.16%

16-24 years

0.84%
0.74%

25-34 years

0.79%
0.59%

35-44 years

0.69%
0.40%

45-54 years

0.53%
0.31%

55-64 years
65-74 years
75 years+
0.00%

0.36%
0.23%
0.27%
0.19%
0.25%

0.20%

0.40%

0.60%

0.80%

1.00%

1.20%

Source: Office for National Statistics. (2023b, January 25). Gender identity: age and sex, England and Wales:
Census 2021. Contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0.

108

Understanding the patient cohort

Online stressors and harm
7.11 Generation Z and Generation Alpha (the
generation born since 2010) have grown up
with unprecedented online access. This has
huge advantages, but also brings new risks
and challenges. Access to the online world
has given children and young people learning
resources, global information and methods
of communication unavailable to previous
generations, but it has also made them
vulnerable to new dangers.
7.12 The Millennium Cohort Study (MCS) is a
UK nationally representative prospective cohort
study of children born into 19,244 families
between September 2000 and January 2002.
A study (Kelly et al., 2018) used this data to
examine the relationship between social media
use and mental health for 14-year-olds within
the cohort (10,904 individuals):
• girls reported more hours of social media
use than boys; 43% of girls used social
media for three or more hours per day
compared with 22% of boys.

• girls were more likely to be involved in
online harassment as a victim or perpetrator
(38.7% versus 25.1% respectively).
• girls were more likely to have low selfesteem (12.8% versus 8.9% of boys), to
have body weight dissatisfaction (78.2%
versus 68.3% of boys) and to be unhappy
with their appearance (15.4% versus 11.8%
of boys).
• girls were more likely to report fewer
hours of sleep than boys and to report
experiencing disrupted sleep often (27.6%
versus 20.2%) or most of the time.
7.13 On average, girls had higher depressive
symptom scores compared with boys. Online
harassment, poor sleep quality and quantity,
poor self-esteem and body image were all
strongly associated with depressive symptom
scores. Figure 24 illustrates the relationship
between these different factors. The thickness
of the arrows shows the strength of
the relationships.

Figure 24: Social media use and depressive symptoms - summary of path analysis

Kelly, Y., Zilanawala, A., Booker, C., & Sacker, A. (2018). Social Media Use and Adolescent Mental Health: Findings
from the UK millennium cohort study. EClinicalMedicine, 6, 59 –68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2018.12.005 © 2018
Published by Elsevier Ltd. under the Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license.
NB: The thickness of the arrow, shows the strength of the relationships.

109

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

7.14 As social media use increased from 0 to
5 or more hours a day, there was a stepwise
increase in depressive symptom scores and
the proportion of young people with clinically
relevant symptoms (Kelly et al., 2018).
7.15 A systematic review of 20 studies found
that use of social media was associated with
body image concerns and disordered eating
(Holland & Tiggermann, 2016). Numerous other
studies implicate smartphone and social media
use in mental distress and suicidality among
young people, particularly girls, with a clear
dose-response relationship (Abi-Jaoude et al.,
2020); that is, the more hours spent online the
greater the effect. The mediating effects of
social media on poor sleep, poor body image
and cyberbullying are common themes across
much of the literature.

Access to sexually explicit
content
7.16 The Children’s Commissioner’s report
in 2023 (Children’s Commissioner, 2023)
found that pornography is so widespread
and normalised that children cannot ‘opt out’.
The average age when children first see
pornography is 13, but 10% have seen it by age
9, and 27% by 11. The pornography that they
are exposed to is frequently violent, depicting
coercive, degrading or pain-inducing acts.
Younger exposure had a negative impact on
self-esteem.
7.17 Young people may passively stumble on
pornography online, receive explicit images from
people they know and, by the age of 16-21, 58%
of boys and 42% of girls were actively seeking
out pornographic material.

110

7.18 Young people aged 16-21 were more likely
than not to assume that girls expect or enjoy
sex involving physical aggression. Among all
respondents, 47% stated that girls ‘expect’ sex
to involve physical aggression such as airway
restriction or slapping, a further 42% stated that
most girls ‘enjoy’ acts of sexual aggression. A
greater proportion of young people stated that
girls ‘expect’ or ‘enjoy’ aggressive sex than boys
do.
7.19 Several longitudinal studies have found
that adolescent pornography consumption is
associated with subsequent increased sexual,
relational and body dissatisfaction (Hanson,
2020).
7.20 Research commentators recommend
more investigation into consumption of online
pornography and gender dysphoria is needed.
Some researchers (Nadrowski, 2023) suggest
that exploration with gender-questioning
youth should include consideration of their
engagement with pornographic content.

Mental health in children
and adolescents
7.21 The striking increase in young people
presenting with gender incongruence/dysphoria
needs to be considered within the context of
poor mental health and emotional distress
amongst the broader adolescent population,
particularly given their high rates of co-existing
mental health problems and neurodiversity.
7.22 Internationally, there have been increasing
concerns about the mental health of Generation
Z. The reasons for this are highly speculative,
although there is ongoing debate about the
contribution of excessive smartphone use and
social media as discussed above.

Understanding the patient cohort

7.23 The Review spoke to a wide range
of mental health professionals about
their observations of rising mental health
presentations across the child and adolescent
population, and reviewed some of the available
UK data.
7.24 UK national surveys between 1999 and
2017 show that there has been a substantial
increase in rates of mental health problems
in child and adolescent populations, with
increased anxiety and depression being most
evident in teenage girls. In 2014, there was a
marked increase in young women aged 16-24
presenting with anxiety, depression and selfharm (NHS Digital, 2018).
7.25 The prevalence of ‘probable mental health
disorder’ in children aged 8-16 years rose from
12.5% in 2017 to 20.3% in 2023. In young
people aged 17-19 years, rates increased from
10.1% in 2017 to 23.3% in 2023 (NHS Digital,
2023).

7.27 Studies of rates of self-harm have shown
similar increases. For example, between 2011
and 2014 there was an almost 70% increase
in young girls between 13 and 16 years old
presenting with self-harm, which was not
paralleled in boys or in other age groups. Rates
of self-harm in 13 and 19 year old girls were
elevated throughout compared to boys (Morgan
et al., 2017).
7.28 The increase in presentations to gender
clinics has to some degree paralleled this
deterioration in child and adolescent mental
health. Mental health problems have risen
in both boys and girls, but have been most
striking in girls and young women. In addition
to increasing prevalence of depression and
anxiety, presentations of eating disorders and
self-harm have increased since the Covid-19
pandemic (Trafford et al., 2023).

7.26 Some conditions (for example, eating
disorders) have increased more than others,
particularly in girls and young women (Table 5).

Table 5: Percentage of children and young people with an eating disorder, by age and sex,
2017 and 2023
11 - 16-YEAR OLDS

17 - 19-YEAR OLDS

BOYS %

GIRLS %

ALL %

YOUNG MEN %

YOUNG WOMEN %

ALL %

2017

0.2

0.9

0.5

0

1.6

0.8

2023

1.0

4.3

2.6

5.1

20.8

12.5

Source: NHS Digital (2023, November 21). Mental Health of Children and Young People in England, 2023 - wave 4 follow
up to the 2017 survey.

111

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Figure 25: Temporal trends in annual age specific self-harm incidence stratified by sex,
2001-2014

Incidence (per 10,000 patients)

100

Boys

Age band (years)
10-12
13-16

80

17-19

60
40

0

Incidence (per 10,000 patients)

100

Girls

80
60
40

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year
Source: Reproduced from Morgan, C., Webb, R. T., Carr, M. J., Kontopantelis, E., Green, J., Chew-Graham, C. A.,
Kapur, N., & Ashcroft, D. M. (2017). Incidence, clinical management, and mortality risk following self harm among
children and adolescents: Cohort study in primary care. BMJ. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4351 with permission from
BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
NB: Standardised by index of multiple deprivation fifth and region of residence.

7.29 As well as the issues highlighted above,
clinicians working in the NHS have seen
increased rates of some more specialist mental
health conditions such as functional tic-like
behaviours, BDD and functional neurological
conditions. These changes have been observed
internationally, and preceded Covid-19, although
some got worse during the pandemic.

112

7.30 Many young people with gender dysphoria
are presenting with combinations of the
above conditions. Sometimes the associated
conditions pre-date the gender dysphoria and
sometimes they follow it. The complex interplay
between these issues is not well understood.

Understanding the patient cohort

113

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

8. Possible factors influencing
the change in patient profile
8.1 More than two decades ago, CohenKettenis and Gooren (1999) wrote: “Adult
gender identity and gender role behaviour
develop gradually over a long period of time
and are inﬂuenced by multiple, interacting
factors, active at different developmental
periods… Our understanding of this process
has increased considerably, but a large part
of it still remains enigmatic”. This quote still
resonates in 2024.
8.2 This report has described the very altered
profile of the children and young people who
are now being seen in NHS gender services.
To inform how to best care for them, it is
essential to understand more about the factors
that are influencing the change in patient profile.
8.3 The change in the profile (with the majority
now being adolescent, birth-registered females)
needs to be considered in the context of
changes in the wider population discussed in
Chapter 7.
8.4 This chapter explores the evidence for
biological factors in the development of a
transgender identity and discusses the more
dynamic contemporary psychosocial factors.

Biological factors
8.5 For many centuries transgender people
have been predominantly trans females,
commonly presenting in adulthood. Some
transgender adults describe being aware of
their gender incongruence and/or being gender
dysphoric from childhood.

114

8.6 The search for a biological cause for
gender incongruence is important to some
transgender people and for some clinicians it is
seen to strengthen the justification that medical
treatment is warranted.
8.7 There are three main areas of research
relating to biological factors: prenatal and/
or pubertal hormone exposure; genetics (twin
studies); and brain structure (imaging studies).

Prenatal and/or pubertal
hormone exposure
8.8 Some authors have hypothesised that
because sexual differentiation of the genitals
takes place in the first two months of pregnancy
but sexual differentiation of the brain only starts
in the second half of pregnancy, these two
processes can be influenced independently,
which may result in gender incongruence
(Swaab & Garcia-Falgueras, 2009).
8.9 As discussed previously, most of the
evidence about the influence of prenatal
hormones comes from the study of people with
DSD. That evidence suggests that prenatal
hormones have a large effect on gender role
behaviours, a moderate effect on sexual
orientation and a small effect on gender identity.
8.10 The second potential period when
hormones may influence gender expression is
puberty. There is evidence that masculinising/
feminising hormone treatments alter
brain structure (Ristori et al., 2020). The
neuropsychological impact of arresting pubertal
development with puberty blockers remains
poorly understood (Baxendale, 2024).

Understanding the patient cohort

Figure 26: Concentrations of serum testosterone in males from conception to puberty.

Serum testosterone (ng/ml)

8

6

4

2

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

Weeks

32

36

T

8

16

24

Weeks

Fetal Age

1

4

8

12

16

Years

Post-natal Age

Source: Adapted from Hines, M. (2020b). Neuroscience and sex/gender: Looking back and forward. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 40(1), 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.0750-19.2019 under: https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/

8.11 However, there is still no clear evidence
that altered hormonal levels prenatally or during
puberty are responsible for the development of
gender incongruence, apart from in those with
DSD, and this is a difficult area in which to test
hypotheses.

Genetics (twin studies)
8.12 As identical twins have identical genes,
when a single gene is responsible for a
characteristic (for example, blood group), the
twins will always have the same outcome (they
will both have the same blood group). Nonidentical twins are like any other siblings; they
only share approximately 50% of their genes,
so they may have different blood groups. Twin
studies compare how often identical twins are
concordant for a condition (that is, both have
the same condition), compared to non-identical
twins. If a condition is strongly genetically
determined, identical twins will have a high level
of concordance compared to
non-identical twins.

8.13 Twin studies in gender identity are
complicated; until recently, most of the large
studies just looked at masculinity or femininity
and did not include diagnosis of gender
incongruence or dysphoria. The few studies
that have included diagnosis primarily relied
on parental report, did not follow through into
adulthood and/or had small sample size. The
older studies suggested that identical twins were
more likely to manifest the same gender identity
than non-identical twins, suggesting some
genetic influence (Klink & Den Heijer, 2014).
8.14 In contrast, a more recent paper
(Karamanis et al., 2022) looked at a large
register-based population in Sweden over the
period 2001 to 2016 and found no evidence for
genetic influence in individuals who had been
formally diagnosed with gender dysphoria and/
or had gender-affirming treatment. The most
important finding was that non-identical twins
of different sex were much more likely than
ordinary siblings to be concordant for gender

115

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

dysphoria (37% compared to 0.16%). One
explanation is that environmental influences
during pregnancy are a more likely explanation
for the development of gender dysphoria than
genetics. This finding therefore gives more
credence to the theories about sex hormone
exposure in the womb mentioned above,
than to genetic factors.

Brain structure
8.15 Researchers have also investigated
whether there are differences in brain structure
in people with gender incongruence. Studies
that look at brain structure, either from postmortem evidence or neuroimaging, are complex.
To date, some evidence has suggested
that the brains of transgender females have
some commonalities with the brains of birthregistered females in terms of the size of certain
structures. However, as there are large overlaps
in the characteristics of male and female brains
it is not possible to tell if a brain is male or a
female (Steensma et al., 2013a).
8.16 Notwithstanding the problems in
determining how ‘male’ or ‘female’ a brain is
outside of extremely large group averages,
some studies do suggest that the brains of
male-attracted transgender females have
changes in a female direction, whilst those who
are female-attracted do not. So, if there are
differences, they may be related to sexuality
rather than gender identity (Steensma et al,
2013a).
8.17 A further issue is that brains are not static.
They change and adapt over time in response
to various activities like learning a new skill,
meditation, exercise or stress. This is known as
brain plasticity. Thus, even if it were possible
to reliably observe any differences in the brain,
these could be a result of rather than a cause of
a transgender identity.

116

8.18 Interpretation of studies on the brain are
also problematic for a number of other reasons.
For example, most studies:
• have examined brains of transgender
females and not of transgender males
• are based on small numbers and have not
been reliably replicated
• have examined brain structures after
treatment with feminising hormones
(rather than before and after treatment),
so changes could be caused by treatment
rather than any inherent differences.
8.19 More recently there has been a shift
from studies that examine whether brains of
transgender individuals are more ‘male’ or
‘female’ to trying to determine whether there
is a unique ‘transgender brain’ (Mueller, 2021).
To examine this, researchers combined the
results of previous imaging studies in one
‘mega’ analysis. The researchers reported that
“rather than being merely shifted towards either
end of the male-female spectrum, transgender
persons seem to present with their own unique
brain phenotype”. However, this type of analysis
commonly generates false-positive findings.
Given that this is such a heterogeneous
population, this would be equivalent to
suggesting that all neurodiverse people had the
same unique brain, which does not seem to be
a plausible hypothesis.
8.20 As imaging technology continues to
advance, brain studies will remain a rich
source of further information. However, to
date, research in this area has not reliably
identified brain changes directly linked to gender
incongruence. Even if they could, this might not
provide information on causality.

Understanding the patient cohort

Summary of biological evidence

Psychosocial factors

8.21 While there is no clear evidence for a
straightforward biological cause for gender
incongruence, it is possible that some
individuals have a biological predisposition,
which may make them more likely to develop
gender incongruence.

8.24 Various explanations have been
advanced for the increase in predominantly
birth-registered females presenting to gender
services in early adolescence often with
complex presentations, and/or additional mental
health problems and/or neurodiversity:

8.22 Expressions of being human vary greatly
in how much biological versus psychological
versus social (environment) causes contribute.
As an unrelated but illustrative example to
help explain this, people who carry the BRCA
gene have a high genetic risk of breast cancer,
whereas for those without the BRCA gene and
with no family history, factors like smoking,
obesity and lack of exercise play a much greater
part. In other words, the end result is the same,
but the causes are different.
8.23 For children and young people with gender
incongruence, ‘innate’ or biological factors may
play a part in some individuals, in ways that are
not yet understood, and in others psychosocial
factors, including life experiences, societal and
cultural influences, may be more important.
Since biological factors have not changed
in the last 10 years it is necessary to look
at other possible reasons for the increase in
referrals and the disproportionate representation
of birth-registered females.

• Societal acceptance: The proposition is
that greater acceptance of transgender
identities has allowed young people to
come out more easily and the increased
numbers now reflects the true prevalence of
gender incongruence within society.
• Changes in concepts of gender and
sexuality: These might include a change
in expressions of sexuality versus gender
and a wider spectrum of expression
(for example, non-binary and other
gender identities that are more common
presentations in birth-registered females).
• Manifestation of broader mental health
challenges: For example, in the same way
that distress can manifest through eating
disorders or depression, it could also show
itself through gender-related distress.
• Peer and socio-cultural influence:
For example, the influence of media and
changing generational perceptions. This is
potentially the most contested explanation,
with the term ‘social contagion’ causing
particular distress to some in the trans
community.
• Availability of puberty blockers: The
change in the trajectory of the referral curve
across many countries coincided with the
implementation of the Dutch approach,
starting first in the Netherlands and then
similarly adopted in other countries.

117

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

8.25 Simplistic explanations of either kind (“all
trans people are born that way” or “it’s all social
contagion”) do not consider the wide range of
factors that can lead young people to present
with gender-related distress and undervalues
their experiences.

Societal acceptance
8.26 Although it is certainly the case that there
is much greater acceptance of trans identities,
particularly amongst Generation Z, and this may
account for some of the increase in numbers,
this is not an adequate explanation for the
overall phenomenon. Arguments that counter
this explanation include:
• the exponential increase in numbers within
a 5-year timeframe is very much faster than
would be expected for the normal evolution
of acceptance of a minority group;
• the rapid increase in numbers presenting
to gender services across Western
populations;
• the change in prevalence from birthregistered males to birth-registered
females. The current profile of transgender
presentations is unlike that in any prior
historical period;
• the sharp differences in the numbers
identifying as transgender and nonbinary and presenting to gender services
in Generation Z and younger Millennials
compared to those over the age of 25-30.
It would be expected that older adults would
also show some signal of distress regarding
their gender, even if they felt unable to
‘come out’;
• the failure to explain the increase in
complex presentations.

118

Changes in concepts of gender
and sexuality
8.27 The relationship between sexuality and
gender identity is complex and contested. A
transgender identity does not determine an
individual’s sexuality. However, in the context
of the Review, it is important to consider the
relationship between sexual identity and gender
identity given that sexuality contributes to a
person’s sense of identity, and both may be fluid
during adolescence.
8.28 In the original Dutch study (de Vries et al.,
2011b), 89% of the 70 patients were same-sex
attracted to their birth-registered sex, with most
of the others being bisexual. Only one patient
was heterosexual.
8.29 In contrast, in a detailed study of young
people with ASD and gender dysphoria (de
Vries et al., 2010), it was noted that ‘‘while
almost all adolescents with GID [gender identity
dysphoria] are sexually attracted to individuals
of their birth sex, the majority of the gender
dysphoric adolescents with ASD were sexually
attracted to partners of the other sex”.
8.30 A paper from the GIDS service in 2016
(Holt et al., 2016) reported sexual orientation
in 57% (97) of a clinic sample of patients over
12 years of age for whom this information was
available. Of the birth-registered females, 68%
were attracted to females, 21% were bisexual,
9% were attracted to males and 2% were
asexual. Of the birth-registered males, 42%
were attracted to males, 39% were bisexual and
19% were attracted to females.
8.31 The Review has not been able to obtain
recent data relating to the sexual orientation of
the GIDS patient cohort. When asked, mixed
responses were given by GIDS clinicians about
the extent to which they explore sexuality with
patients seen in the service, and this may reflect
differences in practice.

Understanding the patient cohort

8.32 In terms of narratives and case histories,
the Review received several reports from
parents of birth-registered females that their
child had been through a period of trans
identification before recognising that they were
cisgender same-sex attracted. Similar narratives
were heard from cisgender adults (some same
sex-attracted and some heterosexual) regarding
early experiences of gender-questioning.
8.33 Clinicians and parents reported that gay
students are still being stigmatised and bullied in
school and there is sometimes a perception that
there is less validation for them than for trans
pupils. However, the Review also heard multiple
testimonies attesting that having a diverse
gender identity is a difficult path with young
people subjected to bullying and abuse.
8.34 It is widely accepted that exposure to
sexuality is happening at a younger age. The
impact of this on young people’s understanding
of their sexuality and/or gender identity is
unclear.
8.35 In some strictly religious cultures, being
transgender is seen as preferable to being
same-sex attracted as it is then perceived as a
physical rather than a psychological issue.
8.36 It is common in adolescence to experience
same-sex attraction and not to conform to
gender stereotypes. In making sense of these
feelings young people are now having to
navigate an increasingly complex interplay
between sex and gender.
8.37 In reality, for any individual young person,
there will be different socio-cultural influences
that impact on their understanding of both
their gender and sexual identity, and this is
an area that warrants better exploration and
understanding.

Manifestation of broader mental
health challenges
8.38 As described previously, rates of mental ill
health in the general population of children and
young people, particularly in girls and young
women, have increased over the past decade.
This parallels the increase in numbers of
children and young people seeking support from
NHS gender clinics.
8.39 The gender clinic referred population
has high rates of mental health diagnoses,
neurodiversity and adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs). At the same time, young
people now seem more likely to mention
gender identity when they attend mental health
services.
8.40 Early audits and research suggest that
ACEs are a predisposing factor. This was
demonstrated from the earliest audit of the
GIDS service (Di Ceglie et al., 2002) and in
the systematic review (Taylor et al: Patient
characteristics)
8.41 Some people rebut the notion that trans
identity may be secondary to mental health
problems, and instead suggest that the mental
health problems that are observed are a
response to minority stress.
8.42 The association is likely to be complex
and bidirectional - that is, in some individuals,
preceding mental ill health (such as anxiety,
depression, OCD, eating disorders), may result
in uncertainty around gender identity and
therefore contribute to a presentation of genderrelated distress. In such circumstances, treating
the mental health disorder and strengthening an
individual’s sense of self may help to address
some issues relating to gender identity. For
other individuals, gender-related distress may

119

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

be the primary concern and living with this
distress may be the cause of subsequent mental
ill health. Alternatively, both sets of conditions
may be associated with and influenced by other
factors, including experiences of neurodiversity
and trauma.
8.43 There are well established effective
treatments for many common mental
health disorders. Individuals presenting
with gender dysphoria should be able to
access these if required, including those with
neurodevelopmental differences who are
frequently disadvantaged in being able to
access mental health services.

of being trans and that particular influencers
have had a substantial impact on their child’s
beliefs and understanding of their gender.
8.49 The Review’s focus groups with gender
diverse young people found that “Young people
struggle to find trusted sources of information,
favouring lived experience social media
accounts over mainstream news outlets”.

8.44 Diagnosis and treatment of mental
ill health in a young person with gender
incongruence/dysphoria should not be a barrier
to their gender issues being considered and
evaluated in parallel.

Peer and socio-cultural
influences
8.45 Sources of information for young people
are predominantly online and peer-to-peer, and
this applies to multiple aspects of their lives.
8.46 The generational changes in
understanding and beliefs about the mutability
Availability of puberty blockers
of gender form the basis for many young
people’s understanding of their own experiences
8.50 The dramatic increase in presentations
and the experiences of those around them.
to NHS gender clinics from 2014, as well as in
several other countries, coincided with puberty
8.47 It is the norm that all experiences of
blockers being made available off protocol and
health and illness are understood through the
to a wider group of young people. The only
norms and beliefs of an individual’s trusted
country with an earlier acceleration in referrals
social group. Thus, it is more likely that bodily
is the Netherlands, where the Dutch protocol
discomfort, mental distress or perceived
was developed.
differences from peers may be interpreted
through this cultural lens.

8.51 It is not possible to attribute causality
in either direction to this association, but it
8.48 More specifically, gender-questioning
remains a possibility that a lower threshold
young people and their parents have spoken to
the Review about online information that describes for medicalisation has had an influence on
the number of young people seeking this
normal adolescent discomfort as a possible sign
intervention.
120

Understanding the patient cohort

Conclusion
8.52 There is broad agreement that gender
incongruence is a result of a complex interplay
between biological, psychological and social
factors. This ‘biopsychosocial’ model for
causation is thought to account for many
aspects of human expression and experience
including intelligence, athletic ability, life
expectancy, depression and heart disease.

8.53 Figure 27 demonstrates how in any
one individual, gender incongruence and/or
dysphoria may be a result of one or two factors,
or it may result from a series of factors that
underpin a young person’s experience and
sense of self.

Who am I?

Figure 27: Complex interplay between biological, psychological and social factors
Predisposition/
Vulnerability
•
•
•

Cultu
ral
Le
ns
ial Stress
c
o
S

Biological
predisposition
Neurodiversity
Adverse Childhood
Experiences

•
•

Puberty

P

o
disp sitio
re

n

Puberty
•
•

Cultural
Lens

Bodily distress
Mental health
vulnerability

Social Stress
•
•

sg

n

de

e

•

Rejection of
femininity or
masculinity
Active embracing of
alternative gender

n e r a b ili

an

•

Tr

Transgender
Narrative

t

y

V

ul

rN

On

arr

li n e s tr e s s o r s

ativ

e

Religious beliefs
enerational
attitudes towards
gender

Not meeting
gender stereotype
expectations
Developing
sexuality

Online
Stressors
•
•

Media, Social media
and online harm
Virtual and
face-to-face contact

Presentation will vary with each individual

Illustrative examples

121

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

8.54 Although we do not have definitive
evidence about biological causes of gender
incongruence it may be that some people have
a biological predisposition. However, other
psychological, personal and social factors will
have a bearing on how gender identity evolves
and is expressed.
8.55 In later childhood and into early puberty,
online experience may have an effect on sense
of self and expectations of puberty and of
gender. As discussed in relation to adolescent
development, this is a time where the drive to
fit in with peers is particularly strong. Young
people who are already feeling ‘different’ may
have that sense exacerbated if they do not fit
in with the demonstrations of masculinity and
femininity they are exposed to socially and/or
online.
8.56 Peer influence during this stage of life
is very powerful. As well as the influence of
social media, the Review has heard accounts
of female students forming intense friendships
with other gender-questioning or transgender
students at school, and then identifying as trans
themselves.
8.57 It is the norm for people to view their
experiences of life events, health and illness
through their own cultural lens and personal
beliefs. Cultural norms in younger people might
impact how they interpret their personal, sexual
and gender identity.
8.58 Puberty is an intense period of rapid
change and can be a difficult process, where
young people are vulnerable to mental health
problems, particularly girls. Unwelcome bodily
changes and experiences can be uncomfortable
for all young people, but this can be particularly
distressing for young neurodiverse people who
may struggle with the sensory changes.

122

8.59 The data on young people’s mental health,
social media use and increased risks associated
with online harm give an appreciation and
understanding that going through the teenage
years is increasingly difficult, with stressors that
previous generations did not face. This can be a
time when mental distress can present through
physical manifestations such as eating disorders
or body dysmorphic disorders. It is likely that for
some young people this presents as genderrelated distress.
8.60 A study followed 2,772 adolescents from
age 11 to 26. Gender non-contentedness (as
defined by the question “I wish to be of the
opposite sex”) was high in early adolescence,
reduced into early 20s, and was associated
with a poorer self-concept and mental health
throughout development. It was also more
often associated with same-sex attraction when
compared to those who did not have gender
non-contentedness (Rawee et al., 2024).
8.61 There is no single explanation for the
increase in prevalence of gender incongruence
or the change in case-mix of those being referred
to gender services. Pragmatically all the above
explanations for the observed changes in this
heterogeneous population are likely to be true
to a greater or lesser extent, but for any individual
a different mix of factors will apply.
8.62 Working through this complex multilayered personal development with the young
person is likely to take some time, and the role
of the clinical team is to help them address
some of these complex issues so that they
can better understand their gender identity
and evaluate the options available to them.

Understanding the patient cohort

123

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Clinical approach
& clinical
management

124

Clinical approach and clinical management

This section looks at clinical approaches and clinical management. It seeks to address
the following areas on which the Review has been asked to provide recommendations:
• clinical management approaches at each point of the specialised pathway of care from
assessment to discharge, including a description of objectives, expected benefits and
expected outcomes for each clinical intervention in the pathway;
• best clinical approach for individuals with other complex presentations;
• the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues and gender affirming drugs.
Any treatment recommendations will include a description of treatment objectives, expected
benefits and expected outcomes, and potential risks, harms and effects to the individual.
Where relevant, each chapter summarises the Review’s commissioned research, other published
work and insights from engagement with service users, parents/carers, clinicians and others.

125

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

9. International practice
and guidelines
9.1 There is understandable public focus on
young people who access medical interventions.
However, from the outset, the Review has tried
to understand what happens for all genderquestioning children and young people seeking
NHS support, including those who do not go on
to a medical pathway.
9.2 The question is: what is the best way
to address, support and manage the
whole population of children and young
people presenting to services with gender
incongruence and/or dysphoria?

rapidly on the international stage with Nordic
countries, and France, as well as some clinics
in Australia, taking a more cautious approach
to gender-related care for children and young
people. The Review’s interim report (2022) also
advised a more cautious approach for the NHS
in England, pending the more comprehensive
findings presented in this final report.

Guideline appraisal

9.6 Clinical guidelines are recommendations
on how healthcare and other professionals
9.3 When considering the best clinical
should care for people with specific conditions;
approach, the Review first wanted to understand for example NICE guidelines in England and
how care is arranged and delivered in other
SIGN guidelines in Scotland. Recommendations
health systems. If good guidance and practice
are based on the best available evidence
already exists internationally it was important to and expert consensus. There are standard
learn from this and adopt it where appropriate.
methods for analysing the research evidence,
9.4 The Review commissioned the University of with systematic reviews being the highest level
of analysis and most trusted way to determine
York to undertake:
what the available research tells us (see
• an appraisal and synthesis of available
Figure 28).
international guidelines (Taylor et al:
9.7 A number of guidelines on the care
Guidelines 1: Appraisal; Taylor et al:
of children and young people with gender
Guidelines 2: Synthesis)
incongruence and/or gender dysphoria have
• an international survey of gender services
been published, some specific to individual
(Hall et al: Clinic survey)
countries and some intended for
• a review of published papers on other
international audiences.
service models.
9.5 During the lifetime of the Review, it has
become apparent that practice is changing

126

Clinical approach and clinical management

Figure 28: A timeline for the included guidelines by geographical region, country and
target population.

Source: Taylor et al: Guidelines 1: Appraisal
NB: AACAP, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry; AAP, American Academy of Pediatrics; APA,
American Psychological Association; ESSM, European Society for Sexual Medicine; HPP, Health Policy Project;
PAHO, Pan American Health Organisation; RCHM, Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne; RCPsych, UK Royal College
of Psychiatrists; SAHCS, South African HIV Clinicians Society; SAHM, Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine;
SSEN, Spanish Society of Endocrinology and Nutrition; UCSF, University California, San Francisco; WPATH, World
Professional Association for Transgender Health.

127

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

9.8 The starting point for the Review was to
seek an appraisal of these guidelines and
determine if some components might be directly
transferable to the NHS in England.
9.9 The University of York identified 23
guidelines published between 1998 and 2022
that contained recommendations about children
and young people with gender dysphoria (four
international, three regional and 16 national):
9.10 The guidelines covered the following key
areas of practice:
• care models, principles and practices
• multi-disciplinary team (MDT) composition,
roles, competencies, and training
• assessment
• psychosocial care (child and family)
• information, education and advocacy
• social transition
• puberty suppressant hormones
• cross-sex hormones
• surgical interventions
• fertility care
• other interventions (for example, voice
therapy, hair removal)
• sexual health and functioning
• physical health and lifestyle.
9.11 The quality of clinical guidelines was
assessed using AGREE II (AGREE Next Steps
Consortium, 2017), which is the most commonly
applied and comprehensively validated
appraisal tool. The AGREE II approach
considers six domains:

128

• scope and purpose
• stakeholder involvement
• rigour of development
• clarity of presentation
• applicability
• editorial independence.
9.12 This was followed by an overall
assessment of quality and whether a guideline
should be recommended for use in practice.
9.13 Rigour of development is an important
bedrock of guideline development. It includes
systematically searching the evidence, being
clear about the link between recommendations
and supporting evidence, and ensuring that
health benefits, side effects and risks have been
considered in formulating the recommendations.
9.14 A 2018 study (Hoffmann-Eßer et al., 2018)
looked at which of the AGREE II domains
were most influential in the overall assessment
scores. The authors found that experienced
reviewers were most strongly influenced
by rigour of development and editorial
independence. This is not a surprising finding.
A guideline may be clear in scope, purpose
and presentation, and have good stakeholder
engagement, but would be hard to recommend
for use in practice if there were weaknesses in
the development process.
9.15 Of the 23 guidelines identified, four did not
provide any information about the development
process, so could not be appraised. The
remaining guidelines were appraised
independently by three reviewers.

Clinical approach and clinical management

Table 6: Critical appraisal domain scores
Table 1 Critical appraisal domain scores
Guideline ID

Scope and
Purpose

Stakeholder
involvement

Rigour of
development

Clarity of
presentation

Applicability

Editorial
Independence

AACAP 2012

65

39

44

63

7

31

American Academy of Paediatrics 2018

70

26

12

30

6

69

American Psychological Association 2015

74

74

24

50

18

14

Council for Choices in Healthcare Finland 2020

91

69

51

72

56

0

de Vries 2006

63

31

10

74

17

6

Endocrine Society 2009

65

33

44

70

22

31

Endocrine Society 2017

63

33

42

72

21

92

European Society for Sexual Medicine 2020

63

52

39

70

7

58

Fisher 2014

65

20

12

35

17

44

Health Policy Project 2015

63

63

16

24

33

6

Norwegian Directorate of Health 2020

76

81

30

57

47

17

Oliphant 2018

44

39

12

33

21

0

Pan American Health Organisation 2014

52

44

13

31

21

0

Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne 2018

81

59

19

41

19

14

Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine 2020

41

24

17

41

7

0

South African HIV Clinicians Society 2021

59

59

21

43

24

69

Strang 2018

87

31

18

37

15

19

Swedish National Board of Health & Welfare 2022

91

87

71

83

25

36

UCSF 2016

70

41

23

37

26

0

WPATH 2012

85

61

26

56

17

17

WPATH 2022

83

63

35

56

24

39

≥70%, 31%-69%, ≤30%.
AACAP, American Academy of Child &Adolescent Psychiatry; UCSF, University of California, San Francisco; WPATH, World Professional Association for Transgender Health

Source: Taylor et al: Guidelines 1: Appraisal

129

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

9.16 Most guidelines scored well on the scope
and purpose domain, but poorly on the rigour
of development, applicability and editorial
independence domains. Only the Finnish
guideline (Council for Choices in Healthcare in
Finland, 2020) and Swedish guideline (Swedish
National Board of Health and Welfare, 2022)
scored above 50% for rigour of development.

Endocrine Society guideline. WPATH 8 cited many
of the other national and regional guidelines to
support some of its recommendations, despite
these guidelines having been considerably
influenced by WPATH 7. The links between
the various guidelines are demonstrated in the
graphics in the guideline appraisal paper (Hewitt et
al., Guidelines 1: Appraisal).

9.17 Most of the guidelines were developed by
a core group of experts in broader consultation
with other professional stakeholders, although
there was lack of clarity about how this input
was incorporated. Just over half engaged with
service users, and again it was unclear how this
influenced recommendations.

9.22 The circularity of this approach may
explain why there has been an apparent
consensus on key areas of practice despite the
evidence being poor.

9.18 Only five guidelines described using a
systematic approach to searching for and/or
selecting evidence (AACAP 2012, Endocrine
Society 2017, Finland 2020, Sweden 2022 and
WPATH 2022).
9.19 For many of the guidelines it was difficult
to detect what evidence had been reviewed
and how this informed development of the
recommendations. For example, most of the
guidelines described insufficient evidence about
the risks and benefits of medical treatment in
adolescents, particularly in relation to long-term
outcomes. Despite this, many then went on to
cite this same evidence to recommend
medical treatments.
9.20 Alternatively, they referred to other
guidelines that recommend medical
treatments as their basis for making the same
recommendations. Early versions of two
international guidelines, the Endocrine Society
2009 and World Professional Association for
Transgender Healthcare (WPATH) 7 guidelines
influenced nearly all the other guidelines.
9.21 These two guidelines are also closely
interlinked, with WPATH adopting Endocrine
Society recommendations, and acting as a
co-sponsor and providing input to drafts of the
130

9.23 Only the Swedish and Finnish guidelines
differed by linking the lack of robust evidence
about medical treatments to a recommendation
that treatments should be provided under
a research framework or within a research
clinic. They are also the only guidelines that
have been informed by an ethical review
conducted as part of the guideline development.
However, these guidelines like others lack clear
recommendations regarding certain aspects of
practice and would benefit from more detailed
guidance regarding implementation
of recommendations.
9.24 The guideline appraisal raises serious
questions about the reliability of current
guidelines. Most guidelines have not followed
the international standards for guideline
development (AGREE Next Steps Consortium,
2017). Therefore, only the Finnish (2020)
and the Swedish (2022) guidelines could be
recommended for use in practice.
9.25 Because of the very widespread influence
and adoption of the WPATH guidance and the
very different approach in the Swedish and
Finnish guidelines, some further detail on the
link between evidence and recommendations in
these guidelines is discussed below.

Clinical approach and clinical management

World Professional Association
for Transgender Healthcare
(WPATH) 8 guideline (2022)
9.26 The WPATH 8 commentary on
adolescence gives a clear account of how
dynamic this period of life is in terms of
cognitive, emotional, gender and personal
development, and how individualised that can
be. The guideline also sets out some of the
knowns and unknowns about the possible
biological contributions to gender incongruence,
as well as recent changes in how gender
diverse young people present to healthcare
services, and the uncertainty regarding how
stable or fluid their gender identity may be.
9.27 WPATH commissioned a systematic
review to underpin version 8, an approach it had
not undertaken for WPATH 7. This systematic
review (Baker et al., 2021) found that “hormone
therapy was associated with increased quality
of life, decreased depression, and decreased
anxiety”. However, “certainty in this conclusion
is limited by high risk of bias in study designs,
small sample sizes, and confounding with
other interventions”. The recommendation
was that “future studies should investigate the
psychological benefits of hormone therapy
among larger and more diverse groups of
transgender people using study designs
that more effectively isolate the effects of
hormone treatment”.
9.28 The WPATH 8 narrative on genderaffirming medical treatment for adolescents
does not reference its own systematic review,
but instead states: “Despite the slowly growing
body of evidence supporting the effectiveness
of early medical intervention, the number of
studies is still low, and there are few outcome
studies that follow youth into adulthood.
Therefore, a systematic review regarding
outcomes of treatment in adolescents is not
possible. A short narrative review is
provided instead”.

9.29 Within the narrative account the guideline
authors cite some of the studies that were
already deemed as low quality, with short followup periods and variable outcomes, as well as a
selected account of detransition rates.
9.30 WPATH 8 concludes in its statement on
the use of gender-affirming medical treatment
that: “The evolving evidence has shown a
clinical benefit for transgender youth who
receive their gender-affirming treatments in
multidisciplinary gender clinics (de Vries et al..,
2014; Kuper et al.., 2020; Tollit et al., 2019)”.
• De Vries et al. (2014) is the original study
of the Dutch protocol sample, which has
marked differences to the population being
treated currently, and as discussed had
much stricter criteria for treatment.
• Kuper et al. (2020) is a study with a one
year follow up that showed very modest
change. It fell into the group rated by the
University of York research team as too
low quality to be included in their synthesis
of evidence on masculinising/feminising
hormones (Taylor et al: M/F hormones).
• Tollit et al. (2019) is a study protocol and
does not include any results.
9.31 The systematic review commissioned by
WPATH is referenced in the chapter on WPATH
8 standards as one of several references in
support of the statements that “There is strong
evidence demonstrating the benefits in quality
of life and well-being of gender-affirming
treatments, including endocrine and surgical
procedures, properly indicated and performed
as outlined by the Standards of Care (Version
8), in transgender people in need of these
treatments” and “Gender-affirming interventions
are based on decades of clinical experience
and research; therefore, they are not considered
experimental, cosmetic, or for the mere
convenience of a patient. They are safe and
effective at reducing gender incongruence and
gender dysphoria”.
131

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

9.32 Clinical consensus is a valid approach to
guideline recommendations where the research
evidence is inadequate. However, instead
of stating that some of its recommendations
are based on clinical consensus, WPATH 8
overstates the strength of the evidence in
making these recommendations.

the original Dutch entry criteria. The guideline
recommended that puberty blockers should
be administered under the supervision of the
national specialist clinic.

Swedish (2022) and Finnish
(2020) guidelines

9.36 The University of York has produced a
narrative synthesis of the guidelines (Hewitt
et al: Guidelines 2: Synthesis). Relevant
information from this synthesis can be found in
later chapters in this report.

9.33 The Swedish guideline took a different
stance to WPATH 8 based on three
considerations:

Key points of learning
for the NHS

• The lack of clear data on how frequently
detransition or regret occurs in young
adults.

9.37 It was clear from the guideline quality
appraisal process that no single guideline could
be applied in its entirety to the NHS in England,
although some had useful and transferrable
recommendations that have been incorporated
where consistent with the rest of the Review’s
findings.

• A re-evaluation of the evidence base
through its own systematic review, which
demonstrated uncertainty about the
strength of evidence in favour of genderaffirming care. It was also noted that
previous guidelines relied much more
heavily on expert opinion rather than on
systematic reviews of the evidence.

9.38 The Review has based its recommendation
on its commissioned systematic reviews, advice
from clinical experts across a range of relevant
areas in the care of children and young people
with gender dysphoria and in other relevant and
important areas of child and adolescent health,
as well as on the mixed methods approach to
stakeholder engagement described earlier.

9.34 Based on the above considerations, the
Swedish guideline recommended that
medical treatment should follow the
original Dutch criteria and should only be
given under a research protocol, or in
exceptional circumstances.

9.39 When the new clinical services are wellestablished and there is further available
evidence, it may be possible to employ more
formal guideline development approaches to
those aspects of gender-related care that still
remain contested.

• The change in epidemiology and lack of
understanding of the cause of the more
recent presentations to gender services.

9.35 The Finnish guideline had reached similar
conclusions on the uncertainty of the evidence
and proposed extreme caution in relation to
the use of puberty blockers in young people
under the age of 18, also reverting largely to

132

Clinical approach and clinical management

133

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

10. Assessment and diagnosis
10.1 As set out in Part 3 of this report, the
individual presentations of many of the children
and young people seeking support are diverse
and complex.
10.2 The heterogeneity of the patient cohort
makes assessment and diagnosis challenging,
and many clinicians, both nationally and
internationally, have told us that there is no
reliable way to accurately predict which young
people might benefit from a medical transition
and which might benefit from alternative
pathway(s) or interventions(s).

International practice
10.3 The York synthesis of international
guidelines (Hewitt et al: Guidelines 2: Synthesis)
found that all guidelines recommend multidisciplinary assessment of the child/young
person, usually over multiple sessions.
10.4 There is limited clarity about the
purpose of assessment. Some guidelines
were focused on diagnosis, some on
diagnosis and eligibility for hormones, some
on psychosocial assessment, and some on
readiness for medical interventions.

10.5 Only the Swedish and WPATH 8 guidelines
contain detail on the assessment process. Both
recommend that the duration, structure and
content of the assessment be varied according
to age, complexity and gender development.
10.6 Within the international guidelines there is
also marked variability in whether both children
and adolescents should be assessed and if so,
how these assessments might differ.
10.7 All guidelines recommend that discussion
of gender development and identity forms part
of assessment, but few provide detail. Several
recommend assessing duration, severity and
persistence of gender dysphoria, and exploring
different aspects including incongruence,
distress, identity, expression, plans and
future desires.
10.8 Very few guidelines recommend
formal measures/clinical tools to assess
gender dysphoria, and a separate analysis
demonstrated that the formal measures that
exist are poorly validated.
10.9 Five guidelines recommend assessing
for neurodevelopmental conditions.
10.10 The range of recommendations in the
guidelines regarding domains that should be
assessed are shown in Table 7.

134

Clinical approach and clinical management

Table 7: Recommended assessment domains
Table 2 – Recommended assessment domains
Gender

Body image

Mental
health
difficulties

Neurodiversity or
ASC

Sexuality or
sexual
orientation

Sexual
functioning
or health

Psychosocial
functioning

Cognitive
functioning /
intelligence

Family
functioning
or support

Physical
health or
conditions

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Danish Health Authority25

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

de Vries et al24

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes*

Yes*

Yes

No

Yes

No

Endocrine Society10

Guideline ID
American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry 17
American Psychological
Association 18

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes†

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

European Society for Sexual
Medicine13

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Health Policy Project

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes*

Yes*

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Norwegian Directorate of
Health30

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Oliphant et al28 29

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

14

Pan American Health
Organisation15
Royal Children's Hospital
Melbourne22 23
Royal College of
Psychiatrists34
SIAMS-SIE-SIEDP-ONIG27

South African HIV Clinicians
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Society31 32
Swedish National Board of
Yes
No‡
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Health and Welfare33
World Professional
Association for Transgender
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Health9
*HEEADSSS suggested as tool which includes sexuality. †Assessment of psychosexual development. ‡Body image scale identified as useful tool.
ASC, autism spectrum condition; HEEADSSS, psychosocial assessment tool covering Home & Environment, Education & Education, Eating & Exercise, Activities, Drugs/Substances,
Sexuality, Suicide / depression, Safety.

NB: Numbered footnotes in column Guideline ID relate to references in source paper.
Source: Taylor et al: Guidelines 2: Synthesis

10.11 The University of York’s international
survey (Hall et al: Clinic survey) provides insight
into how clinical practice compares to guideline
recommendations and found marked variability:
• Duration and number of assessment
appointments that a young person would
receive varied within and between clinics
and were often said to be tailored to
individual need. Only Spain had a single
assessment appointment with psychology
involvement optional.

Only five clinics reported routine discussion
of fertility preferences, and only two
discussed sexuality. Finland was the only
country to report routinely assessing for
history of trauma.
• Fourteen tools were used across 10
clinics to measure gender incongruence.
Only five were used in more than one clinic.
There were 36 measures used to assess
co-occurring conditions, with only 10
used by more than one clinic.

• Most clinics assess mental health
and gender development, and usually
psychosocial functioning.
135

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

NHS practice
10.12 In a survey of the Gender Identity
Development Service (GIDS) clinicians
conducted by the Review in its early stages, the
range of opinion on the purpose of assessment
was apparent. The survey found that “There is
not a clear view amongst the specialists who
responded to the survey as to the purpose of
the assessment. Some respondents felt that
assessment should be focused on whether
medical interventions are an appropriate course
of action for the individual. Other respondents
believe that assessment should seek to make a
differential diagnosis, ruling out other potential
causes of the child or young person’s distress.”
(PowerPoint Presentation (cass.independentreview.uk))
10.13 The majority (79%) of respondents to the
gender specialists survey agreed or strongly
agreed that psychological formulation can be
helpful in assessing children and young people
needing support around their gender identity.
Those respondents who agreed reasoned
that it can provide a structured process for

136

understanding the child/young person’s
distress and provide a more holistic picture of
them which can be helpful in developing an
appropriate care plan.
10.14 The University of York also invited GIDS
to participate in the international survey (Hall et
al: Clinic Survey) to record practice in England,
but GIDS did not respond.
10.15 In the absence of a formal clinical audit
from GIDS or a response to the international
survey, the Multi-Professional Review Group’s
(MPRG’s) updated report (Appendix 9)
represents the most comprehensive review of
clinical notes and approach available, albeit only
for those children and young people referred for
puberty blockers.
10.16 The MPRG’s reflections should be
considered with General Medical Council
guidance in mind: “Medical notes should
provide an accurate record of the exchange
of information leading to a decision in order to
inform [the patient’s] future care and to help
explain and justify the clinician’s decisions and
actions” (General Medical Council, 2020).

Clinical approach and clinical management

In summary, the MPRG’s findings are as follows:
• The structure of the assessment process was rarely provided.
• It was not clearly evidenced how thoroughly ‘gender identity and consideration of
different options for gender expression’ and ‘different treatment options/choices’
[as per the Standard Operating Procedure] were explored.
• There was inconsistent evidence as to whether the individual impact of social transition
had been explored.
• The clinical notes rarely provided a structured history or physical assessment even though
the children and young people presenting had a wide range of familial and congenital
conditions.
• Sexuality was not consistently discussed.
• The history of the child/young person’s gender journey was rarely examined closely for
signs of difficulty, regret or wishes to alter any aspect of their gender trajectory.
• Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) traits
or diagnoses were mentioned in the majority of cases, but it is not clear how fully or
appropriately these had been explored.
• No family trees were made available, making it difficult to understand family structure and
relationships.
• There was a lack of evidence of professional curiosity as to how the child/young person’s
specific social circumstances may impact on their gender dysphoria journey and decisions.
• Although external reports (for example, from the child/young person’s school) were useful,
they were frequently not up-to-date.

137

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Perspectives from service
users and families
10.17 There was also a general lack
of understanding among service users
participating in the lived experience focus
groups about what the assessment was for
and confusion about what was assessment
and what was diagnosis. Thoughts on the
purpose of assessment included:
• To support young people to explore their
options and access the care that’s right for
them.
• To get validation of their trans identity and
access to the medication pathway.
• To make the person comfortable and focus
on what they’re looking for from the service.
• To ensure patients have an understanding
of the healthcare options available.

10.18 Young people describe a mismatch
between what they want and expect from the
process and their experience or perception
of what actually happens. While the public
narrative has often asserted that decisions
about interventions were taken with insufficient
exploration, the experiences or perceptions of
some of the young people who were seen by
GIDS, and some of their parents was that the
process of assessment was too onerous
and invasive.
10.19 Qualitative research, undertaken by the
University of York (Appendix 3), found that
service user experiences and perceptions of
the assessment process vary. “Some young
people looked forward to talking with someone
who understood them. Some, however, felt
uncomfortable and initially found it difficult to
talk about how they felt. Others expressed
frustration, disappointment and at times, anger.
They believed talking slowed down or prevented
access to medical pathways.”

Holistic Approaches to Care

“What is needed is a space whereby
people's understandings of themselves
are valued, whilst also providing an
open space for exploration of what this
means to the individual, and what
support they need in order to live a
happy and fulfilled life.”
GIDS clinician
Specialist questionnaire page 22

“Everyone's needs are different
and I think having an open space
where it's patient focused and
patient-led is essential.”
Young person
Focus group

Reasons to go to a gender service:
“To be able to feel more confident
in myself and more happy with
my body and who I am.”

138

“The fact that I’d feel more like
myself would be the main reason.”

Clinical approach and clinical management

10.20 There was consensus among service
users, parents/carers and clinicians around
the need for a holistic approach to care, where
children and young people and their families feel
listened to and able to explore what they may
need to feel happy, confident and able to thrive.

Holistic assessment framework

Assessment should seek to understand the
holistic needs of the child or young person and
their family. This process should determine
whether there are any cooccurring and/
or contributory elements of the individual’s
presentation that are affecting their psychosocial
wellbeing or functioning and require support as
the basis of an individual care plan.

10.21 Based on the uncertainties, differing
recommendations and lack of clear detail found
in international guidelines and practice, the
Review’s Clinical Expert Group concluded that
there was no approach to assessment that
could be directly adopted for use in the NHS.

Presentations, pathways and outcomes for this
cohort are very individual, and there needs to
be a focus on helping each person to find the
best pathway for them. Assessments should
be respectful of their experience and be
developmentally informed.

Development process

Not all children and young people will need an
in-depth assessment and will get what they
need from other forms of local support, informed
by consultation and advice from specialist
practitioners.

10.22 It was agreed that the Clinical Expert
Group should work with the Review to develop
a consistent, reproducible, developmentally
informed, holistic assessment framework to:
• support identification of individual needs
• allow outcomes to be measured more
consistently and
• ensure children and young people have a
similar experience of the service.
10.23 Clinical experts in a range of related
areas of child and adolescent development,
health, and wellbeing contributed to the
development of the framework and the views
of stakeholders have been considered and
incorporated where appropriate.
10.24 The CEG agreed the following statement
of the key aims and principles for assessment:

Clinicians along the pathway should remain
open and explore the patient’s experience and
the range of support and treatment options
that may best address their identified needs.
Taking a collaborative needs-based approach
supports the development of the child or young
person’s broader wellbeing and functioning with
the aim of reducing distress, improving their
psychological functioning, sense of wellbeing
and quality of life.”
The framework provides a starting point
for services to assess immediate risk and
determine the complex care needs of the
children and young people referred to
the service.

“The purpose of assessment is to derive a
multi-level formulation for a child or young
person who presents to the NHS seeking
help around their gender or experience of
gender-related distress.

139

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Structure and content
10.25 The holistic assessment framework
has been split into eight non-sequential
domains centred around the individual child/
young person and their parents/carers. Weight
given to each component is dependent on
individual needs. These domains are consistent
with assessment models used in the care of
children, young people and families in other
child, adolescent clinical care, and consider the
individual as a whole.
10.26 Domains that connect more specifically
to understanding gender development, gender

10. Holistic Assessment

incongruence and gender-related distress and
dysphoria have also been incorporated drawing
upon relevant literature.
10.27 When undertaking an assessment,
clinicians should remain open-minded, have
no preconceived outcome and should have
an appreciation that the child/young person’s
priorities may change over time. They should
also be aware of parent/carer expectations
and the impact these may have on the young
person’s priorities, or alternatively the potential
for significant disagreement/fragmentation
within families about the nature of the child/
young person’s distress.

Figure 29: Holistic needs assessment - essential components

Developmental
History
Understanding the
child/young person’s needs,
including physical, language,
cognitive, social and
emotional development.

Family
Understanding
children/young
people in the context
of their family and
home environment.

Gender
Development &
Experiences

Understanding the
child/young person’s physical
health history and impact of
any health issues on
development and wellbeing.

140

Understanding the nature of
the child/young person’s
well-being and functioning in
their education setting and
quality of peer/social
relationships.

Sexual
Development
Understanding a child/young
person’s sexual development
including knowledge of the
body, puberty and emerging
sexual orientation.

Assessment of the child/young
person’s gender development
over time, including
assessment of distress and
impact on functioning.

Physical
health needs

Education setting
and social context

Safeguarding

Mental health

Assessment of any
safeguarding concerns
and adhering to
recognised principles of
safeguarding and risk
management.

Understanding any
coexisting or
contributory mental
health concerns and risk.

Clinical approach and clinical management

Family context

Physical health needs

10.28 Understanding children in the context of
their families and home environments, including
family makeup, key relationships, strengths,
resources and social circumstances, as well as
parental/carer health and well-being, is a core
principle of good practice across health and
social care settings.

10.33 An understanding of the child or young
person’s physical health history and the impact
of any health issues on development and
wellbeing is important.

10.29 It is particularly important in this group
of young people given that there is evidence
of an increased frequency of family parental
physical and/or mental ill health and other family
stressors in this group (Di Ceglie et al., 2002;
Taylor et al: Patient characteristics).
Development

10.34 Long-term health conditions can
influence various aspects of children’s
development and may include elevated anxiety
around health and wellbeing for both children
and their parents.
10.35 The child/young person may have
needed to make complex adjustments both
socially and emotionally. They could also have
experienced trauma in relation to medical
experiences or hospitalisations.

10.30 A detailed developmental history seeks to Mental health
gather information from parents/carers about the
10.36 Children and young people referred to
young person’s development, including physical,
specialist gender services have higher rates
language, cognitive and social development.
of mental health difficulties than the general
10.31 Environmental, social and psychological
population. Because gender incongruence is
factors unique to every child and family can
not considered to be a mental health condition
affect development. During the transition
clinicians are often reluctant to explore or
from childhood to adolescence young
address co-occurring mental health issues
people can experience substantial social,
in children and young people presenting with
emotional and physical changes. This domain
gender distress. Regardless of any other causes
requires additional areas of focus where
for mental health conditions, living with gender
a neurodevelopmental condition is either
issues and the process of transitioning (if this is
confirmed or suspected.
felt to be the appropriate path for an individual)
comes with challenges.
10.32 Given the high prevalence of
neurodiversity identified within this population,
10.37 The mental health assessment within
all those attending children and young people’s
a gender clinic should follow the structure
NHS gender services should receive screening
of a standard evidence-based core CAMHS
for neurodevelopmental conditions (Strang et
assessment. There are many published
al., 2016). Where appropriate, consideration
examples of suggested structures for this
should be given to cognitive and
assessment, which may involve the use of
language assessments.
validated questionnaires for children and
young people and their carers to inform
further assessment.

141

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

10.38 In a standard mental health assessment,
all of the other seven domains described as
part of this holistic assessment framework
are usually considered in depth in relation to
mental health. Systematic questioning should
include enquiry about mood, anxiety, emotional
regulation, beliefs around weight, potential
somatic symptoms, concentration, sleep and
appetite, self-harm, and suicidal thoughts and
behaviours. A mental state examination should
be included as appropriate.

Safeguarding

10.39 A mental health diagnostic formulation
incorporates diagnosis, level of impairment, risk
assessment, and consideration of predisposing,
precipitating and perpetuating/maintaining
factors and how they impact on current
functioning.

10.44 Sources of risk in this group include:

10.40 Identifying and treating mental health
difficulties should be an integrated part of the
care for children and young people presenting
with gender dysphoria. Evidence-based
treatments to support mental health and
resilience, should be available to children and
young people presenting with gender issues
as they would be to any other young people
presenting to NHS services.
Education, peer relationships and social
context
10.41 Consideration of the child/young
person’s functioning in relation to education,
their broader well-being and the nature of their
peer relationships is important in assessing
their overall functioning and supports a
holistic understanding of their strengths and
vulnerabilities.
10.42 It is important to obtain information
about school attendance and any difficulties in
educational achievement, as well as a recent
Education, Health and Care plan for any young
person with special educational needs.

142

10.43 As with all health care provision, when
working with children and young people
safeguarding must be a consideration. There
are complex ways in which safeguarding
issues may be present. Clinicians working with
children and young people experiencing gender
dysphoria have highlighted that safeguarding
issues can be overshadowed or confused when
there is focus on gender or in situations where
there are high levels of gender-related distress.

• transphobic bullying in school and in other
settings
• breakdown in relationships with families
• online grooming or harm
• cultural or religious pressure.
10.45 The Review has heard about a small
number of cases where the child’s gender
identity was consciously or unconsciously
influenced by the parent. It is very important
that the child/young person’s voice is heard and
that perceptions of gender identity represent the
child/young person’s sense of self.
10.46 The Review has also heard a series
of accounts of children and young people at
safeguarding risk being lost to follow up and / or
of young people presenting to the emergency
department with a safeguarding history that staff
were unaware of because of changes of name
and NHS number.
10.47 Staff should remain alert to these
complexities and know when to act, raising
them during supervision and with the wider
Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT), and adhering
to recognised principles of safeguarding and
risk management as applied to children/young
people and their parents/carers.

Clinical approach and clinical management

10.48 Clinicians should assess and consider
safeguarding across each domain of the
assessment framework, documenting issues
fully within this dedicated domain.
Gender development and experiences
10.49 Clinicians should undertake an in-depth
assessment of the child/young person’s gender
development over time, how this manifested and
how it has been managed within the family.
10.50 Clinicians should seek to understand
whether any steps have been taken towards
social transition and any impacts on well-being,
or whether the child/young person wants to
make changes.
10.51 An assessment of the presence and
impact of any distress should be undertaken,
including the impact and experience of puberty
and pubertal changes. The clinician should
examine the impact of any distress on, for
example, daily functioning, social or relationship
issues, any sensory issues that may be
contributing to the distress and steps that may
have been taken to manage this.
10.52 The child/young person’s expectations
and hopes about support pathways, their
understanding of the range of pathways
and outcomes, and the pros and cons of
interventions at different points in time should
also be considered, including potential fertility
and broader health impacts.
10.53 Depending on the age and stage of
development of each individual child/young
person, this may need to be discussed with
the child/young person and parent/carer, both
together and apart to generate a thorough
record of what has been observed, by whom
and when, to gain a sense of their individual
gender feelings and history. It is also important
to understand whether there are any differences
in perception between the child/young person
and their parents/carers and whether this has
been the cause of conflict or family breakdown.

Sexual development, knowledge and
sexual orientation
10.54 Clinicians should seek to understand the
child/young person’s emerging sexuality and
sexual orientation, consistent with assessments
in other adolescent settings, where deemed
appropriate to age and context.
10.55 If this has been an area of concern for
younger children, the clinician could capture
this elsewhere, for example when looking
at safeguarding, developmental history and
exposure to adversity and trauma.

Formulation, diagnosis
and care plan
10.56 The assessment is a first step in forming
a relationship with a child/young person
and their family/carers and developing an
understanding of the child/young person as an
individual in the context of their aspirations and
needs. The assessment should lead to three
further steps:
• A formulation of all the factors that are
important to the child/young person’s
presentation
• A list of any relevant diagnoses
• An individualised care plan.

Formulation
10.57 The clinician working with the child/young
person should use the information gathered to
develop an evidenced formulation. This should
be created and agreed with the child/young
person and their parents/carers.

143

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Figure 30: Formulation

Formulation

Individualised

Formulation makes sense of the information
gathered through the assessment. It is a way to
synthesise factors (biological, psychological and
social) that may be contributing to a child's/young
person’s overall development, health, wellbeing and
functioning.
It is a collaborative process between the child/young
person, the parents/carers, and the lead clinicians. It
should be supported by the wider multi-disciplinary
team and used to inform the development of an
individualised care plan.

10.58 Formulation is used to make sense
of and pull together information gathered
through an assessment to create a shared
understanding of the child/young person’s
strengths and assets, as well as difficulties
and needs, to inform the development of an
individualised holistic care plan. It is a widely
practised approach by a range of professionals
and across health services and is endorsed
by professional and other organisations
(Havighurst & Downey, 2009; Skills for
Health, 2016).
10.59 The formulation approach offers a
structure for synthesising the information
gathered during the assessment and for
negotiating differences of opinion. It can be
carried out at various levels of detail and
complexity and can be helpful in identifying other
factors that may be influencing gender-related
distress and where there is agreement about
areas to work on, even if differences of opinion
remain. Importantly, it allows all parties to hold
an open and mutually respectful position about
a child/young person’s gender identity whilst
defining a personalised intervention package.

144

Examples in

psychosoc
therapeuti

parent/car

support fro
profession

referral for
assessmen

Diagnosis and differential
diagnosis
10.60 The clinician’s role in a consultation is
to integrate information from a patient’s history,
assessment and any investigations or tests, in
order to determine the most likely cause of their
symptoms, and how best to address them.
10.61 In addition to the process of formulation
described above, this often involves arriving at
a formal diagnosis. The diagnostic process is
a complex, collaborative activity that involves
clinical reasoning and information gathering to
understand the patient’s problem (Balogh et al.,
2015).
10.62 Differential diagnosis is the process
of ruling out other possible diagnoses that
present in a similar way.
10.63 Differential diagnosis is seen by some
as an attempt to find ‘any other reason’ for
the person’s distress rather than them being
transgender and feel strongly that clinicians
should not be actively looking for reasons to
“excuse away” how the young person feels.

Clinical approach and clinical management

10.64 There are several reasons why listing all
relevant formal diagnoses is important for this
group of children and young people:
• In order to provide the best evidencebased care, it is important that the clinician
considers all possible diagnoses which may
be hindering the young person’s wellbeing
and ability to function and thrive.
• The clinician carries responsibility for
the assessment, subsequent treatment
recommendations, and for any harm that
might be caused to a patient under their
care. They need to define, as clearly and
reproducibly as they possibly can, exactly
what condition they are treating, in order to
be accountable for their decisions on the
options offered to the patient. In the case
of offering potentially irreversible medical
treatments to patients, it is important to
specify whether they meet formal diagnostic
criteria for medical dysphoria in any other
conditions.

10.66 ICD-11 (WHO, 2022) has attempted to
de-pathologise gender diversity, removing the
term ‘gender identity disorders’ from its mental
health section and creating a new section for
gender incongruence and transgender identities
in a chapter on sexual health. ICD-11 defines
gender incongruence as being “characterised by
a marked incongruence between an individual’s
experienced/expressed gender and the
assigned sex.” It refers to a mismatch between
birth registered and experienced gender but
does not include dysphoria (distress) as part
of its diagnostic requirements. Gender variant
behaviour and preferences alone are not a basis
for assigning the diagnosis. The full criteria for
gender incongruence of childhood and gender
incongruence of adolescence or adulthood are
listed in Appendix 10.

10.67 DSM-5 (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013), revised in 2022 (DSM5-TR) (American Psychiatric Association,
2022) is the most widely used framework for
diagnosing gender dysphoria (Appendix 10).
• The University of York’s systematic review
In addition to describing the incongruence
(Taylor et al: Patient characteristics)
between experienced/expressed gender and
demonstrated that other diagnoses were
assigned gender, DSM 5-TR specifies that “In
not consistently documented, and in order
order to meet criteria for the diagnosis, the
to better understand and support these
condition must also be associated with clinically
children and young people it is essential
significant distress or impairment in social,
that all diagnoses are systematically
occupational, or other important areas
recorded for clinical and research purposes. of functioning.”
10.65 There are two widely used frameworks
10.68 The University of York [Hewitt: Guidelines
which provide diagnostic criteria. The
2: Synthesis] found no clear consensus across
International Classification of Diseases (ICD),
international guidelines reviewed as to whether
which is the World Health Organization (WHO)
DSM-5 diagnosis of gender dysphoria or
mandated health data standard, and the
ICD 11 diagnosis of gender incongruence is
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
preferred. However, the international survey
Disorders (DSM), which is the classification
[Hall et al: Clinic Survey] demonstrated that in
system for mental health disorders produced
clinical practice the DSM-5 diagnosis of gender
by the American Psychiatric Association. The
dysphoria is more widely used, this also applies
current versions - ICD-11 and DSM-5 - came
to research publications.
into effect in January 2022 and
2013 respectively.

145

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

10.69 The Review has heard mixed views
about how young people perceive the value
of a diagnosis of gender dysphoria. Many
young people do not see themselves as
having a medical condition and some may
feel it undermines their autonomy and right
to self-determination. Others see diagnosis
as validating, and important when looking to
access hormone treatment.

“It is a good thing because then solutions
can be made. However, the way that it is
diagnosed is important so that dysphoria is
not increased. It is important to be able to
make sure people are safe and mentally well.”
"I don’t care personally, but it is important to
me that medical professionals understand that
I require gender-related medical care, and that
diagnosis can function for that. I would prefer
that diagnosis is not a prerequisite for care."

10.72 Previously, a diagnosis of gender
dysphoria has been the basis for initiating
medical treatment, however, this is not
predictive that the individual will go on to have
longstanding trans identity.
10.73 Understanding how the gender-related
distress has evolved in that particular individual,
what other factors may be contributing, and the
individual’s needs and preferences for treatment
are equally important. It is also important to
ensure that there is a focus on functioning,
general well-being and resilience, to ensure the
child/young person is able to make considered
decisions about their future pathway.

"Having a diagnosis doesn’t make you “any
more trans” than someone who doesn’t."

Individualised care plan

Young people
Lived experience focus groups

10.74 The holistic needs assessment and
subsequent formulation should lead to the
development of an individualised care plan
with input from the multidisciplinary team.

10.70 The qualitative research conducted by
the University of York (Appendix 3) found that:
“For many young people - and young adults
- dysphoria is a useful medical label, helping
to legitimise and explain experience. It also
helped justify asking for support […] Overtime,
however, some expressed ambivalence. They
continued to understand the value of dysphoria,
but thought it could also represent an unhelpful
diagnosis, in which their social experience could
only be regarded as legitimate if a medical label
were attached.”

146

10.71 The qualitative study goes on to say
“Clinicians understand the importance of
diagnosis, particularly when justifying decision
making, but remained sensitive to overmedicalisation, especially when a person’s
dysphoria was socially located.”

10.75 This should be a collaborative process
that involves a young person and their
healthcare professional working together to
reach a joint decision about care. Shared
decision making involves choosing treatments
based both on evidence, and on the person’s
individual preferences, beliefs and values
(NICE, 2021)

Clinical approach and clinical management

10.76 An individualised care plan should
include potential pathways of psychosocial
support, recommendations on therapeutic
interventions, referral for endocrine assessment
where clinically indicated, parent/carer and
sibling support options as well as wider
recommendations for further support that might
be accessed from local professional networks.
Figure 31: Individualised Care Plan

Individualised Care Plan
Examples include:

to
and
oung
ng and

psychosocial support and
therapeutic interventions
parent/carer support

d/young
cians. It
iplinary
f an

support from local
professional networks
referral for endocrine
assessment

10.77 The Review has kept at its heart the
concern that the NHS is dealing with a group of
young people who frequently, albeit not always,
will be in a state of considerable distress by the
time they reach the NHS, and will often have
multiple unmet needs.
10.78 There should be a tiered approach
to any intervention package outlined in an
individualised care plan which:
• addresses urgent risk
• reduces distress and any associated mental
health issues and psychosocial stressors,
so the child/young person is able to function
and make complex decisions

• co-develops a plan for addressing the
gender dysphoria, which may involve a
combination of psychological and physical
treatment options.
10.79 The controversy surrounding the use of
medical treatments has taken focus away from
what the individualised care and treatment plan
is intended to achieve, both for the individual
seeking support from NHS gender services and
for the overall population.
10.80 Young adults, interviewed for the
University of York’s qualitative research study,
“expressed an incredibly diverse range of
experiences and pathways. Many benefitted
from access to medical pathways, which
they said, enabled them to lead the lives they
wanted. Others explored equally empowering
options, such as social transitioning and more
fluid and non-binary expressions of gender.”
(UoY qualitative research summary report,
page 10)
10.81 Several young people and young adults
participating in the lived experience focus
groups similarly reflected that it is important to
inform people that medical transition is not the
only option and that choosing not to go down
that route does not invalidate their identity.
“I think it’s helpful for people to know that
there’s not only one route or one set way to
transition or be trans. They might want just
hormones, or just surgery, people are
different with different experiences,
presentations and bodies. It’s fine for that to
be the case, it’s okay to have different plans
for your medical transition.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

147

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

10.82 The qualitative study found that “For
some, initial gender questioning created a
sense of urgency, much of which focused on
accessing medical pathways. These young
adults acknowledged that their original response
was to “fix” the problem. This became less
important to them as they grew older. Some
explained that discovering different ways to
express gender identity was one of the most
important things they had learned. They wished
this had been explained to them when younger
but remain uncertain about the extent they
would have listened to such advice.”
(Appendix 3).
10.83 The central aim of the assessment
process and individualised care plan is to
help young people to thrive and achieve their
life goals. For the majority of young people,
a medical pathway may not be the best way
to achieve this. For those young people for
whom a medical pathway is clinically indicated,
it is not enough to provide this in the absence
of addressing any wider mental health and/
or psychosocially challenging problems such
as family breakdown, barriers to participation
in school life or social activities, bullying and
minority stress.

148

Recommendation 1:
Given the complexity of this
population, these services must
operate to the same standards
as other services seeing children
and young people with complex
presentations and/or additional
risk factors. There should be a
nominated medical practitioner
(paediatrician/child psychiatrist) who
takes overall clinical responsibility
for patient safety within the service.

Recommendation 2:
Clinicians should apply the
assessment framework developed
by the Review’s Clinical Expert
Group, to ensure children/
young people referred to NHS
gender services receive a holistic
assessment of their needs to
inform an individualised care plan.
This should include screening for
neurodevelopmental conditions,
including autism spectrum disorder,
and a mental health assessment.
The framework should be kept
under review and evolve to reflect
emerging evidence.

Clinical approach and clinical management

149

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

11. Psychological and
psychosocial interventions
11.1 There are many different ways of helping
gender-questioning young people improve
their health and wellbeing, regardless of their
longer-term decisions about medical or social
transition.
11.2 Part 3 described the wide range of
associated conditions that may be part of a
picture of gender related distress. A holistic
package of care to address these issues may
involve a broad range of options such as:
• supporting a young person to get back into
school
• diagnosing autism or ADHD
• supportive group sessions
• psychological interventions to help anxiety,
depression or trauma
• building resilience
• working with the whole family to address
breakdowns in relationships
• providing more information about gender
expressions and the range of possible
interventions.
11.3 The terms psychological therapies,
psychotherapy, psychosocial interventions and
talking therapies are often used interchangeably
in everyday settings. Strictly speaking,
psychological interventions refer to treatments
based on a theory of psychological functioning,
while the term psychosocial interventions is less
specific and is used to describe a wide range
of supportive approaches to improving mental
health, wellbeing and functioning.

150

11.4 The role of psychological therapies in
supporting children and young people with
gender incongruence or distress has been
overshadowed by an unhelpfully polarised
debate around conversion practices. Terms
such as ‘affirmative’ and ‘exploratory’
approaches have been weaponised to the
extent that it is difficult to find any neutral
terminology. This has given the impression that
a young person can have either therapeutic
interventions or a medical pathway.
11.5 Whilst the Review’s terms of reference
do not include consideration of the proposed
legislation to ban conversion practices, it believes
that no LGBTQ+ group should be subjected
to conversion practice. It also maintains the
position that children and young people with
gender dysphoria may have a range of complex
psychosocial challenges and/or mental health
problems impacting on their gender-related
distress. Exploration of these issues is essential
to provide diagnosis, clinical support and
appropriate intervention.
11.6 The intent of psychological intervention is
not to change the person’s perception of who
they are but to work with them to explore their
concerns and experiences and help alleviate
their distress, regardless of whether they pursue
a medical pathway or not. It is harmful to equate
this approach to conversion therapy as it may
prevent young people from getting the emotional
support they deserve.

Clinical approach and clinical management

11.7 No formal science-based training in
psychotherapy, psychology or psychiatry
teaches or advocates conversion therapy. If
an individual were to carry out such practices
they would be acting outside of professional
guidance, and this would be a matter for the
relevant regulator.

Perspectives from
service users and families
11.8 The Review’s work with service users,
parents/carers and clinicians revealed a
perceived gap in provision for those who are
exploring/questioning their gender identity
but are unsure of what it means for them.
The length of the wait before being seen
means many young people are forced to
undertake this exploration on their own.

11.8 - Perspectives

“Good mental health services would have
really been a big benefit for me as I was
exploring my identity, dealing with things
like dysphoria….”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

“I would hope that going forwards, there
would be more treatment options available
for young people experiencing gender-based
distress as well as physical interventions,
such as third wave CBT, family therapy or
psychotherapy at GIDS”
GIDS clinician
Specialist questionnaire

“My GP was fine with gender stuff but he
was only willing to give me one diagnosis in
my life… I can have more than one thing
‘wrong’ with me, many people do, there’s
also a link between ADHD, Autism and
Gender stuff – but it all feels ignored, like
they just see my diagnosis for dysphoria and
they refuse to see the rest. It doesn’t feel like
my other experiences are valid.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

11.10 - Perspectives

11.9 Young people want a non-judgemental
space to talk about how they are feeling and
options for care. They also want help to reduce
the dysphoria (distress) that they are feeling.
11.10 Parental and personal narratives
described children and young people having
more than one issue presenting, but services
(e.g. GIDS, CAMHS, GP), dealing with each
issue in isolation, without considering the
impact of issues on each other. This may
include neurodivergence or significant mental
health issues, including past history of eating
disorders, experiences of loss and/or trauma
and bullying.

“I knew walking in that I wasn’t going to get
any help from them, I just had to tell them
what they wanted to hear. I knew that they
were the doorway to getting me what I wanted.
I wouldn’t speak openly about any concerns I
had because I knew that could prevent me
from accessing the care I needed.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

151

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

11.11 Some young people have spoken about
the perception that disclosing neurodiversity,
mental health issues or trauma would be
used to discredit their sense of identity. It is
concerning that young people may not feel they
can be honest with their health professionals.
They describe the sense that they need to play
a role and manage services to get what they
need. This has led to some people actively not
seeking help with their mental health or hiding
mental health issues.

International guidelines
and practice
11.12 Historically the model of care for children
and young people presenting with gender
incongruence or distress was entirely based
on a psychosocial model, with early medical
intervention with puberty blockers being
introduced more recently. Most clinical teams
would still see this as the starting point in a care
pathway.
11.13 This is in part reflected in the University
of York’s synthesis of international guidelines
(Hewitt et al: Guidelines 2: Synthesis) which
found that all but two guidelines describe
psychosocial support as a key component of
care.
11.14 Earlier guidelines described psychosocial
care as the mainstay of treatment, and the
recent Finnish and Swedish guidelines describe
it as the first line treatment. However, there is
now an emerging international divergence, with
five guidelines saying that not all children or
adolescents will need psychosocial care, and
all but one of these five promoting a genderaffirmative approach to care.

152

11.15 Another problem across the international
guidelines is the lack of detail on the aims,
approach or end point of psychological/
psychosocial interventions. There is variability,
and a lack of definition and consensus
about gender exploration, in particular about
whether it should form part of the assessment,
and whether it is important for children and
adolescents or just children.
11.16 These discrepancies in approach echo
the tensions that have entered the debate in the
UK about affirmative or exploratory approaches.
11.17 Most guidelines discuss psychosocial
support for parents and highlight the importance
of parental care and support for children and
young people in their gender care. Most also
suggest providing education about gender
development and identity to young people
and their families.
11.18 The additional challenges in supporting
looked after children are flagged in six
guidelines.
11.19 Despite recommendations regarding
the need for psychosocial interventions,
the international survey (Hall et al: Clinic
Survey) reported that in practice psychosocial
interventions were quite limited across the
responding gender services. Five clinics had
no in-house provision, and others offered a
small range of options and/or psychoeducation.
This highlights a gap between aspiration and
delivery.

Clinical approach and clinical management

Understanding the evidence
11.20 The University of York conducted a
systematic review to identify and summarise
evidence on the outcomes of psychosocial
interventions for children and adolescents
experiencing gender incongruence (Heathcote
et al: Psychosocial support).
11.21 Only ten studies met the inclusion criteria.
Study quality was assessed as low in nine of the
studies and moderate in one study. Selection
criteria for participants were not clearly defined,
and the studies lacked appropriate comparators.
11.22 The studies used various interventions:
• Some using standardised approaches such
as cognitive behaviour therapy, mindfulness
and self-compassion, or attachment-based
family therapy,

11.24 The most commonly reported outcomes
related to mental health (depression, anxiety
and suicidality).
• Four out of eight studies which reported
on depression (either alone or within a
combined mental health outcome) reported
significant improvements.
• Three out of five studies which reported on
anxiety (either alone or within a combined
mental health outcome) also reported
significant improvement.
• Three out of four studies that looked at
suicidality found significant improvements
in suicidality scores, and one found no
change.

• Some using more focused approaches
developed or adapted specifically for
gender or sexual minority youth.

11.25 The studies focusing on psychological
changes and/or psychosocial changes found
improvements in a range of aspects such
as resilience, self-compassion and selfacceptance, as well as quality of life, global
functioning, participation and well-being.

11.23 All studies included in the final analysis
used validated instruments to assess outcomes,
but there was little congruence between studies
on the measures used.

11.26 Where there was adequate follow-up,
studies found that many of these outcomes fell
off over time. There was no indication across
the studies of adverse or negative effects.

Figure 32: Psychosocial support interventions: outcomes measured

Source: Data from Heathcote et al: Psychosocial support

153

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

11.27 Because of the low quality, poor reporting
of the intervention details and heterogeneity of
the interventions and their aims and outcome
measures, it was not possible to directly
compare the different types of interventions.
It was also not possible to determine which
specific approach might work best for whom.
11.28 The University of York concluded
that there is limited research evaluating
outcomes of psychosocial interventions for
children and adolescents experiencing gender
incongruence, and low quality and inadequate
reporting of the studies identified. Therefore,
firm conclusions about their effects cannot be
made. Identification of the core approach and
outcomes for these interventions would ensure
they are addressing key clinical goals, attending
to the needs of children and families as well as
supporting future aggregation of evidence.

Current NHS practice
11.29 GIDS reports that only a minority
of children and young people go on to an
endocrine pathway, so the Review was keen
to hear about what support and treatment
packages were offered to those who did not go
on to a medical pathway. However, despite a
number of discussions and a focus group with
GIDS staff on this topic, it has not been possible
to obtain any clear information about the range
of options offered.
11.30 Within the GIDS service, patients
may have had anything from a one or two
appointments to in excess of 100. This indicates
that some practitioners must have been
providing therapeutic input to patients, despite
the fact that there was not a formal structured
programme in place.

11.31 Because the assessment process at
GIDS appears to have been organic, without a
clear end point, it seems that an assessment
has formed the starting point for a therapeutic
relationship which could continue over many
sessions.
11.32 It appears that, for those young people
for whom an endocrine option was not the best
option, staff at GIDS were doing their best to
provide ongoing support, perhaps because local
services were not able to offer this. In addition,
staff were clearly in a difficult position balancing
the needs of ongoing patients with the pressure
of the waiting list.
“It's bit controversial and I don't wanna upset
or anger anyone, but like buffer periods and
I know it is just like a touchy subject but I
personally when I was 14, like found [social
media influencer] YouTube and was like, oh
my gosh, I'm a trans man. This is me, like I
need to go on testosterone, I need to get top
surgery, I need to like do all these things.
And I was so sure I wanted to testosterone
for like 2, 3 years.
I am really glad that I didn't go on
testosterone, because I realized during like
my 17 sessions at GIDS that that wasn't for
me. And it was really through those sessions
and also a lot of self-exploration, and I was
so, so, sure that I wanted it.
So I think, buffer periods of like 7 years - no,
that's not the vibe, but having spaces where
you can have proper informed consent. Like
is really important and exploring all of your
options and being aware of all of the
consequences. Consequences is a very
negative, heavy loaded term, but like, yeah,
consequences because, sometimes people
do things and it's not right for them at the
time, or maybe it is right for them at the time,
but isn't later on. So yeah. Sorry, if that
offends anyone.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

154

Clinical approach and clinical management

“If someone is like dead set on wanting
something be that like hormone treatment or
surgery. Making sure those referrals happen
and they don't have to wait years on years
just to get on the list. I think that's quite
important. You know, if someone is well
informed they know exactly what they want, I
don't see why there should be any, like
obviously giving informed consent, but I
don't see why there should be like a buffer
period if someone's very much like, no I
know what I want.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

11.33 Clinicians have also reported that the
length of the waiting list can be a barrier to
having exploratory discussions with children
and young people that could provide them with
a broader range of options for addressing their
distress. This is because by the time young
people are seen they have often made their
minds up that an endocrine pathway is their
chosen option and do not want to consider other
approaches.
11.34 The Review also heard that some staff
had looked at how standard evidence-based
treatments (in this case third-wave CBT) could
be used to help young people to manage their
gender-related distress, stressing that this can
be achieved without pathologising or changing
a young person’s gender identity (Canvin 2022).
However, this was not developed into a full
research study.

Summary - psychological and
psychosocial interventions
11.35 Psychological and psychosocial
interventions serve multiple different purposes
for this group of children and young people,
dependent on any underlying mental health
problems and the particular features of their
gender presentation. However, there has
been a failure to systematically consider how
psychosocial interventions should be used and
to research their efficacy.
11.36 Some therapies, which are well proven
for associated mental health problems, already
have a strong evidence base. Where it is clear
that children/young people have such problems,
they should receive the appropriate therapies
in the same way as any other young person
seeking support from the NHS. Outcome
measures should include evaluating the impact
on the associated medical health condition,
and any additional impact on the gender-related
concerns and distress.
11.37 Beyond this first line approach, it
is important to understand how specific
therapeutic modalities may help the core
gender dysphoria and bodily distress.
11.38 One of the given rationales for puberty
blockers is that they may improve gender
dysphoria or overall mental health. The
evidence to date does not provide strong
support for this (see Chapter 14). Furthermore,
even after masculinising/feminising hormones,
dysphoria may still persist. Therefore, it is
important to explore other approaches for
addressing the gender-related distress, which
in itself is debilitating. These may be of value
regardless of whether or not an endocrine
pathway is chosen.

155

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

11.39 Navigating life as a transgender person
can be challenging. Individuals may encounter
hostility for being who they are and are likely to
suffer from minority stress. If the ultimate goal
of any intervention is to help the child or young
person to function and thrive, they need to be
provided with tools and strategies to give them
the best opportunity to do so.

“I also feel there should be support with
mental health. Whether it be towards gender
identity or towards the stress. And having a
way to cope with the stress that comes with
going through the process and that comes
with being trans in general.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

11.41 Other participants spoke of the personal
damage that a lack of parental support had
had on their adult relationships with their family.
They suggested that in-person and online
support groups for parents and carers to meet
other parents and carers and professionals who
can answer their questions and provide mental
health support/counselling if needed
was incredibly important.
“I think that access to informational texts are
really important. I did a lot of my research on
the internet and got told so much false
information because there were so many
sources, so some trustworthy informational
sources about being transgender, social and
medical transitions, etc, would have
benefited me a lot.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

“I know lots of trans kids who are really
struggling with their mental health, not
because of their gender not because they
struggle with where they fit it but because of
how society and institutions treat them.”
Parent
Listening session

11.40 Children and young people thrive best
when in a supportive family environment and
facilitating the health and well-being of all family
members will be important in achieving this
end. Some participants in the Review’s lived
experience focus groups highlighted the positive
role of families, carers and others in supporting
them to navigate transition and related care.

156

“I feel like there is a lack of support for parents
who are uneducated and want to learn how
they can support their child, and also for ones
who have to essentially go through a loss in
their life. It may be hard for them to come to
terms with the fact that they've lost something
and gained another, so a service that could
provide support and guidance for parents
would be extremely useful.”
Parent
Listening session

11.42 The role of family therapists in addressing
some of the above problems and challenges
should also be considered.

Clinical approach and clinical management

11.43 In summary, there is a lack of evidence
about alternative approaches for managing
gender-related distress, and it is difficult
to obtain information about routine clinical
practice or pathways of care for children and
young people who do not receive medical
interventions. An explicit clinical pathway must
be developed for non-medical interventions, as
well as a research strategy for evaluating
their effectiveness.

Recommendation 3:
Standard evidence
based psychological and
psychopharmacological treatment
approaches should be used to
support the management of the
associated distress and cooccurring
conditions. This should include
support for parents/carers and
siblings as appropriate.

157

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

12. Social transition
12.1 Through discussions with stakeholders,
it is clear that social transition is a cause of
concern for many people, and our remarks
about social transition were some of the most
quoted parts of the Review’s interim report.
12.2 The approach taken to social transition
is very individual but it is broadly understood
to refer to social changes to live as a different
gender such as altering hair or clothing, name
change and/or use of different pronouns. There
is a spectrum from relatively limited gender
non-conforming changes in appearance in
adolescence to young people who may have
fully socially transitioned from an early age and
be ‘living in stealth’ (that is, school friends/staff
may be unaware of their birth-registered sex).
12.3 There are different views on the benefits
versus the harms of early social transition.
Some consider that it may improve mental
health and social and educational participation
for children experiencing gender-related
distress. Others consider that a child who
might have desisted at puberty is more likely
to have an altered trajectory, culminating in
medical intervention which will have life-long
implications.
12.4 One key difference between children and
adolescents is that parental/carer attitude and
beliefs will have an impact on a child’s ability to
socially transition, whereas adolescents have
more personal agency.
12.5 Social transition may not be thought of as
an intervention or treatment, because it is not
something that happens in a healthcare setting
and it is within the agency of an adolescent
to do for themselves. However, in an NHS
setting it is important to view it as an active
intervention because it may have significant
158

effects on the child or young person in terms of
their psychological functioning and longer-term
outcomes.
12.6 Although the focus of the Review is on
support from point of entry to the NHS, no
individual journey begins at the front door of
the NHS, rather in the child’s home, family and
school environment. The importance of what
happens in school cannot be under-estimated;
this applies to all aspects of children’s health
and wellbeing. Schools have been grappling
with how they should respond when a pupil says
that they want to socially transition in the school
setting. For this reason, it is important that
school guidance is able to utilise some of the
principles and evidence from the Review.

International practice
12.7 The University of York’s review of
international guidelines (Hewitt et al: Guidelines
2: Synthesis) found that most guidelines
recommend providing information about the
benefits and risks of social transition but vary
in whether the recommendations apply to both
children and adolescents or just to children.
12.8 WPATH 8 guidance has moved from a
‘watchful waiting’ approach for children to a
position of advocating for social transition as a
way to improve children’s mental health.
12.9 Several guidelines recommend that
social transition should be framed in a way
that ensures children can reconsider or
reconceptualise their gender feelings as they
grow older.
12.10 Several guidelines discuss education
about the risks and benefits of binders and
packers, and safe use as appropriate.

Clinical approach and clinical management

Reflections from the MultiProfessional Review Group

Perspectives from service users
and families

12.11 The Multi Professional Review Group
(MPRG) report (Appendix 9) notes that many
children and young people attending GIDS
have changed their names by deed-poll, attend
school in their chosen gender and some have
changed NHS numbers by the time they are
seen. Based on the MPRG review of the notes,
this history/journey was rarely examined closely
by GIDS for signs of difficulty, regret or wishes
to alter any aspect of the child/young person’s
gender journey trajectory.

12.14 Young people and young adults have
spoken positively about how social transition
helped to reduce their gender dysphoria and
feel more comfortable in themselves. However,
it is the reaction of those around them that can
make it difficult. Young people identified that
space to talk about socially transitioning and
how to handle conversations with parents would
be helpful. They feel that parents and carers
need more information about social transition
and the best way to support their child through
that process.

12.12 The MPRG is concerned that some
children living in stealth have a common,
genuine fear of “being found out”, suffering
rejection either due to not having taken friends
into their confidence (withholding personal
information regarding biological sex or specific
sex-based experiences), or due to transprejudice or transphobia. They observed that
this fear of “being found out” is driving a sense
of urgency to access puberty blockers, which
may not allow consideration of other pros and
cons of the treatment.
12.13 The MPRG also observed that living in
stealth appears to increase a child’s level of
stress and anxiety with resultant behaviour and
mental health problems. These included social
withdrawal, with children becoming increasingly
isolated, including resorting to home-schooling
or tutoring and even rarely leaving their house.

“It would be helpful to show that there is no
judgement in experimenting with their
appearance such as clothing and makeup.
Also to be shown how they don't need to
have a specific label to use and should try to
feel as comfortable as they can.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

“To me social transition is an act undertaken
by the child, so I wouldn’t call it an active
intervention. [The] question is whether to
support it or not and to factor in if the child is
considering it or has already announced it.
[The] act by community is supporting or not
supporting.”
Young trans adult
Listening session

12.17 - Perspectives

159

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

12.15 The qualitative research conducted by
the University of York (Appendix 3) found that,
while waiting for clinical input many young
people “took steps to help manage how they
felt and most socially transitioned while waiting.
The process, although dynamic and flexible,
was positively regarded by young people. Many
parents, although initially hesitant, come to
understand the value of social transitioning.
A few, however, remained anxious about its
impact. Families would have welcomed advice
on how to negotiate social transitioning but
many experienced difficulties in accessing
support”.

“Pre-social transition, [child] had social
difficulties due to ASD and was bullied. After
social transition [child] was given enormous
kudos at school. They were geeky and
awkward, but became a celebrity.”
Parent
Listening session

“Her whole friends group has some sort of
trans or nonbinary identity. Older friends don’t
seem to be in that camp – they are open and
supportive but not identifying. It seems to
have been socially beneficial to her to
present as trans – as a high functioning
autistic person – it has helped her with her
social life. Her friends seem to be celebrating
in trans identities.”

12.16 However, the Review heard concerns
from many parents about their child being
socially transitioned and affirmed in their
expressed gender without parental involvement.
This was predominantly where an adolescent
Parent
had “come out” at school but expressed concern
Listening session
about how their parents might react. This set up
an adversarial position between parent and child
where some parents felt “forced” to affirm their
child’s assumed identity or risk being painted as 12.18 Clinicians have said that most children
transphobic and/or unsupportive.
have already socially transitioned before
reaching the specialist gender service. Some
12.17 Some parents who spoke to the Review
clinicians have suggested that support to think
felt that social transition was of more benefit to
through social transition could happen within
their child in terms of its social impact than it
local services and does not need to sit within
helping to manage their gender incongruence.
NHS specialist services.
They describe how their children were
12.18 - Perspectives
previously isolated and bullied but their status
amongst peers had improved as a result of
“Ideally local services should be available to
“coming out”.
young people where they can discuss and
explore their gender, be supported to try out
social transition etc. If this was the case a
specialist service would only be needed if
they wanted assessment for physical
interventions or there were multiple factors
at play that local services felt unable to
support with.”
Clinician
Specialist survey

160

Clinical approach and clinical management

Understanding the evidence
12.19 The University of York’s systematic
review on social transition aimed to identify and
summarise evidence on the outcomes of social
transition for children and adolescents with
gender dysphoria. (Hall et al: Social transition).
12.20 This systematic review is a useful
example demonstrating how systematic
reviewers rate the quality of studies. The scale
(called a modified version of the NewcastleOttawa Scale) was used to assess the items
shown in Figure 33 and then give a summary

score for each of the studies. The maximum
score is 8, a score of 0-3.5 is low quality, 4-5.5
moderate quality and 6-8 high quality.
12.21 Of the 11 studies that met the search
criteria, nine were low quality (scoring between
1.5 and 3.5) and two were moderate quality
(scoring between 4.5 and 5.0). The most
problematic aspects were sample selection, and
samples were not reliably representative of the
broader population. Most studies were
US based.

Total score

4.5

3.5

3.5

Wong 2019

Sievert 2021
5.0

van der Vaart 2022

1.5

3.5

Turban 2022

1.5

3.0

Steensma 2013

1.5

2.5

Russell 2018

Not Applicable

Olson 2022

Scores 0.0

Olson 2016

Scores 0.5

Gibson 2021

Scores 1.0

Fontanari 2020

Durwood 2017

Figure 33: Quality scores for included studies assessed using a modified
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale

2.0

Representativeness of socially transitioned group
Comparison group drawn
Reliability of ascertainment of social transition
Group comparability: Match or control for age, sex or gender, SES
Group comparability: Control for baseline or parental/family support
Assessment of outcome - validated scale
Sufficient time after social transition for outcomes to occur
Adequate follow up (<10% lost to follow up/evidence for lack of bias)

Source: Hall et al: Social transition
NB: The gird indicates individual scores for each study on each of the criteria. Bars at the top (and numbers at top of
bars) indicate overall score. SES: socioeconomic status.

161

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

12.22 The quality of the studies was not good
enough to draw any firm conclusions, so all
results should be interpreted with caution.

Mental health outcomes
12.23 Different studies looked at different
outcomes of social transition. The only
consistent benefit from social transition was for
use of chosen name in adolescence:
• one study found this was associated with
some improvements in mental health and
reduced suicidality for 15-21 year-olds

their pronouns to the binary gender pronouns
that were not those used at their births. The
study found that 93% of those who socially
transitioned between three and 12 years old
continued to identify as transgender at the end
of the study (about 5.4 years later). Of the
remainder, 2.5% were living as cisgender, 3.5%
as non-binary and 1.3% had retransitioned
twice. This study also demonstrated that
the majority of children who had socially
transitioned went on to progress to
medical interventions.

Gender identity outcomes

12.26 Another study (Steensma et al., 2013b)
found that childhood social transition was a
predictor of persistence of gender dysphoria
for those birth-registered male, but not those
birth-registered female. In this study 96% of
those birth-registered male and 54% of those
birth-registered female who later desisted had
not socially transitioned at point of referral and
none had fully socially transitioned (see Table 8).
The study noted that the possible impact of the
social transition on cognitive representation of
gender identity (that is, how the child came to
see themself) or on persistence had not
been studied.

12.25 One study (Olson et al, 2022) used a
self-selected community sample of children
(the Trans Youth Project). Children had to
be between three and 12 years of age at
enrolment and had to have made a “complete”
binary social transition, including changing

12.27 However, there was also an association
between childhood social transition and more
intense gender dysphoria, so it may be that the
intensity of the dysphoria was the factor that led
to persistence and the more pressing drive for
the children to socially transition.

• another study found that parental use of
chosen name and being able to express
one’s gender was associated with some
improvements in mental health/distress for
16-24 year-olds.
12.24 One study looking at transgender
adults found that lifetime suicide attempts and
suicidal ideation in the ‘past year’ was higher
among those who had socially transitioned
as adolescents compared to those who had
socially transitioned in adulthood.

Table 8: Childhood social transition and likelihood of persistence
PERSISTERS % (n=47)

DESISTERS % (n=80)

BR-M

BR-F

BR-M

BR-F

(n=23)

(n=24)

(n=56)

(n=24)

No social transition

57

42

96

54

Partial social transition

30

54

4

45

Full social transition

13

4

0

0

Total

100

100

100

100

Source: Data from Steensma et al., 2013b.
BR-M: birth-registered male | BR-F: birth-registered female

162

Clinical approach and clinical management

Relevance to existing guidelines

12.34 It is not possible to attribute causality
in either direction from the findings in these
12.28 There has been a shift in
studies. This means it is not known whether the
recommendations between WPATH 7 (2012),
children who persisted were those with the most
which was more cautious about social transition, intense incongruence and hence more likely to
and WPATH 8 (2022) which argues in favour of
socially transition, or whether social transition
social transition in childhood.
solidified the gender incongruence.
12.29 WPATH 8 justifies this change in stance
on the basis that there is more evidence on
improved mental health outcomes with social
transition, that fluidity of identity is an insufficient
justification not to socially transition, and that
not allowing a child to socially transition may
be harmful.
12.30 However, none of the WPATH 8
statements in favour of social transition in
childhood are supported by the findings of the
University of York’s systematic review (Hall et al:
Social Transition).

Summary - social transition
12.31 Given the weakness of the research in
this area there remain many unknowns about
the impact of social transition. In particular, it is
unclear whether it alters the trajectory of gender
development, and what short- and longer-term
impact this may have on mental health.
12.32 Early research cited in Chapter 2 found
low rates of persistence of childhood gender
incongruence into adulthood, around 15% (for
example, Zucker, 1985). Papers from this period
were criticised because the children were not
formally diagnosed using ICD or DSM. At that
time, it was rare for children to have socially
transitioned before being seen in clinic.

12.35 Earlier in this report it was explained
that much has been learnt about the role of
sex of rearing on the development of gender
identity from follow-up studies of individuals
with health conditions known as differences of
sex development (DSD). It is helpful to recap on
some of this learning when considering the role
of social transition. In summary:
• Individuals who are genetically female (XX)
but have high androgen levels(i.e. those
with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia) are
usually reared as females; they tend to have
some male role behaviours but are most
commonly heterosexual and usually have a
female gender identity.
• In those with DSD in whom gender identity
outcome is less well established, the sex
of rearing is a better predictor of gender
identity outcome than prenatal
androgen exposure.
• The conclusion is that a complex interplay
between prenatal androgen levels, external
genitalia, sex of rearing and socio-cultural
environment all play a part in eventual
gender identity, and we have yet to
understand the relative influence of these
various elements.

12.33 Later studies, which showed higher rates
of persistence at 37% (for example Steensma et
al., 2013) did use formal diagnostic criteria, but
by that time a greater proportion of the referrals
had socially transitioned prior to being seen.

163

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

12.36 The information above demonstrates
that there is no clear evidence that social
transition in childhood has positive or negative
mental health outcomes. There is relatively
weak evidence for any effect in adolescence.
However, sex of rearing seems to have some
influence on eventual gender outcome, and it
is possible that social transition in childhood
may change the trajectory of gender identity
development for children with early gender
incongruence. For this reason, a more cautious
approach needs to be taken for children than
for adolescents:
Children:
• Parents should be encouraged to seek
clinical help and advice in deciding how to
support a child with gender incongruence
and should be prioritised on the waiting list
for early consultation on this issue.
• Clinical involvement in the decision-making
process should include advising on the
risks and benefits of social transition as
a planned intervention, referencing best
available evidence. This is not a role that
can be taken by staff without appropriate
clinical training.
• It is important to ensure that the voice of
the child is heard in any decision making
and that parents are not unconsciously
influencing the child’s gender expression.
• For those going down a social transition
pathway, maintaining flexibility and
keeping options open by helping the child
to understand their body as well as their
feelings is likely to be advantageous. Partial
rather than full transition may be a way of
ensuring flexibility, particularly given the
MPRG report which highlighted that being
in stealth from early childhood may add to
the stress of impending puberty and the
sense of urgency to enter a
medical pathway.

164

Adolescents:
• For adolescents, exploration is a
normal process, and rigid binary gender
stereotypes can be unhelpful. Many
adolescents will go through a period of
gender non-conformity in terms of hairstyle,
make-up, clothing and behaviours. They
also have greater agency in how they
present themselves and their
decision-making.
• For those considering full social transition,
the current long waiting lists make it unlikely
that a formal clinical assessment will be
available in a timely manner. However, it
is important to try and ensure that those
already actively involved in their welfare
(parents/carers, any involved clinical
staff such as their GP, school staff or
counsellors) provide support in decision
making and plans to ensure that the
young person is protected from bullying
and has a trusted source of support.
For both children and adolescents:
• Outcomes for children and adolescents are
best if they are in a supportive relationship
with their family. For this reason parents
should be actively involved in decision
making unless there are strong grounds to
believe that this may put the child or young
person at risk.
• Help may be needed if a child/young
person wishes to reverse their decision on
transitioning, which can be a difficult step
to take.

Clinical approach and clinical management

• 12.37 The clinician should help families
to recognise normal developmental
variation in gender role behaviour and
expression. Avoiding premature decisions
and considering partial rather than full
transitioning can be a way of ensuring
flexibility and keeping options open until the
developmental trajectory becomes clearer.

Recommendation 4:
When families/carers are making
decisions about social transition
of pre-pubertal children, services
should ensure that they can be
seen as early as possible by
a clinical professional with
relevant experience.

165

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

13. Medical pathways
Figure 34: Outline of medical pathway at start of Review

Assessment

Puberty Blockers

Tanner 2+

Oestrogen or
Testosterone

16+

Surgery

13.1 When the Review began, the medical
interventions for gender incongruence/
dysphoria available on the NHS were puberty
blockers followed by masculinising or feminising
hormones. The history of their use was outlined
in Part 2.

Perspectives from service
users and families
13.2 Young people participating in the lived
experience focus groups explained that while
they do want access to counselling and spaces
to openly explore their gender, this should be
alongside not instead of the option to medically
transition. They also felt there needed to be

166

18+

recognition that mental health may still be a
concern after starting on a medical pathway,
while waiting for changes to take effect.
“I just wanted to get my bloody hormones,
that was what I was there for, that’s what I
wanted, that would’ve been my therapy, all
my distress was related to needing to get on
hormones and I was expressing this, I had a
trans history, I was clearly aware of what I
wanted and what care was on offer.”
Young person
Lived experience focus group

Clinical approach and clinical management

13.3 For those who are considering a medical
transition, there is a strong sense among
service users that this should be facilitated
by the NHS, but a recognition that there is a
need for better information on which to base
decisions/consent.
13.4 Young people and young adults
participating in the Review’s focus groups
highlighted a lack of reliable and accurate
information about medical transition. In
particular, the need to be informed of any
known and unknown risks and potential side
effects of hormone interventions when making
informed decisions about care and treatment.
Some participants felt there needed to be more
information for people wanting to come off the
medical pathway.

“What are the benefits, what have people
who've gone through each process thought
about it, what are the side-effects, what are
the possible drawbacks, what is the
time-scale, how reversible is it, what the
process actually involves (e.g. not being
able to do stuff for several months after
certain surgeries), what medical
professionals think about it, what everyday
people who've done it think about it, what
are the things nobody tells you (e.g.
post-surgery dysphoria), what is the
satisfaction rate (preferably with some
stories of people who've done it and loved
it, and some who've done it and didn't love
it as much).”

Existing endocrine practice
in the UK
13.5 One of the most problematic data gaps
for the Review has been trying to obtain robust
data on the numbers of young people who go
on to a hormone pathway at GIDS, and what
care pathways or interventions are available for
those who do not. This seems unacceptable in
the digital age.
13.6 Our working assumption, based on
original data provided to the Review, was that
approximately 20% of those referred to GIDS
go on to a medical pathway.
13.7 Performance data received by NHS
England and shared with the Review indicated
that this was probably an accurate proportion
of all cases seen by the service. However,
the data suggested that around 50% of these
patients received only one appointment before
being discharged from GIDS, usually because
they had ‘aged out’ of the service before the
assessment could be completed.
13.8 If those patients are discounted, it appeared
that a significantly higher percentage of active
cases (those undergoing full assessment) were
being referred to endocrinology. In order to get a
clear picture, the Review wrote to NHS England
requesting that an audit of discharge records
be undertaken.

Young person
Lived experience focus group

167

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

13.9 NHS England approached NHS Arden and At the point of discharge from GIDS:
Greater East Midlands Commissioning Support
• 54.8% of all patients referred to
Unit to undertake this audit on behalf of the
endocrinology were on both puberty
Review and NHS England. The audit (Appendix
blockers and masculinising/feminising
8) looked at discharge records of patients who
hormones (57.9% of [birth-registered]
had been discharged from GIDS between 1
females compared to 47.7% of [birthApril 2018 and 31 December 2022. This covered
registered] males).
the period pre and post the Bell v
• For patients who initially received puberty
Tavistock judgments.
blockers upon referral to endocrinology,
13.10 The following patients were included in
64% had gone on to receive both puberty
the data collection:
blockers and masculinising/feminising
hormones at point of discharge from GIDS.
• patients who have attended at least two
appointments at GIDS
• patients who have been discharged from
GIDS between 01 April 2018 and 31 Dec
2022.
13.11 Of the 3,499 patients audited, 3,306 were
included within the analysis. 73% were birthregistered female and 27% birth-registered
male. The audit did not include patients who had
received fewer than two appointments at GIDS
or those who lived outside England and Wales.
Headline findings from the audit were:
• Overall, 27% of patients were referred to
endocrinology (34.6% of [birth-registered]
males compared to 24.2% of [birthregistered] females). This equates to 584
birth-registered females and 308 birthregistered males.
• Patients received an average of
6.7 appointments prior to referral to
endocrinology.
• 81.5% of patients referred into
endocrinology received puberty
blockers, of whom 52.5% were between 1516 years old.

168

• < 10 patients detransitioned back to their
[birth-registered] gender, all of whom were
female, and all but one were confirmed
as having received puberty blockers as
their first intervention. These patients had
received an average of 6.5 appointments
prior to referral to endocrinology (range 3-10
appointments).
• 89% of patients who were referred to
endocrinology were discharged to an adult
Gender Dysphoria Clinic (GDC).
13.12 Table 9 on the next page shows the
end point intervention recorded on patients’
discharge summaries: 54.8% ended up on
both puberty blockers and masculinising/
feminising hormones.

Clinical approach and clinical management

Table 9: Final intervention received by GIDS patients referred to endocrinology
FI RST I NT E RV E NT I O N T Y PE

% O F PAT I E NT S

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones

54.8

Puberty blockers ONLY

19.9

Patient declined treatment

11.4

Accessed treatment outside of the NHS

3.9

Did not access physical treatment

3.3

Puberty assessment ONLY

2.0

Treatment withdrawn

1.5

Detransitioned/detransitioning

X

Unknown/unclear

X

Puberty blocker not started due to JR

X

Treatment recommended but supply issues (GP prescribing or pharmacy)

X

Treatment withdrawn - professional advice/side effects

X

Cross-sex hormones ONLY

X

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones (privately)

X

Source: The Gender Identity Development Service Audit Report, Arden & GEM
NB: X indicates <10 patients

13.13 The GIDS audit report (Appendix 8) also
sets out that 73% (2,415) of the audited patients
were not referred to endocrinology by GIDS. Of
these:
• 93.0% did not access any physical
treatment whilst under GIDS
• 5.0% accessed treatment outside
NHS protocols
• 1.5% declined treatment
• 0.5% of patients detransitioned or were
detransitioning back to their [birthregistered] gender.

13.14 The Review received reports from
support and advocacy groups that some young
adults who had been discharged from GIDS
remained on puberty blockers into their early to
mid 20s, but did not progress to masculinising/
feminising hormones. A review of the audit
data suggested 177 patients were discharged
whilst still on puberty blockers only (that is,
not with masculinising/feminising hormones),
but it is not possible to tell from this data how
many subsequently came off puberty blockers
and/or progressed to masculinising/feminising
hormones through adult or private services.

• 69% were discharged to an adult GDC
(possibly due to ageing out of the GIDS
service). It is not known how many of these
went on to hormone treatment through the
adult services.
169

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

13.15 Puberty blockers are intended to be a
short-term intervention and the impact of use
over an extended period of time is unknown,
although the detrimental impact to bone density
alone makes this concerning. The Review
raised this with NHS England and GIDS.

International practice
13.16 The University of York carried out a
systematic review and narrative synthesis of
the international care pathways of children
and young people referred to specialist gender
or endocrinology clinics (Taylor et al: Care
pathways). This places GIDS data in a
wider context.
13.17 The systematic review aimed to
synthesise information on numbers referred,
assessed, diagnosed and considered eligible for
medical intervention, numbers who later desist
or detransition, reasons for leaving the service/
pathway and provision of psychological care.
13.18 The systematic review included 23 studies
across nine countries; 14 specialist gender and
nine endocrinology services. A major problem in
interpreting these results is that models of care
differ and there is a lack of clarity in the source
papers as to how individual clinics function.
Some endocrinology services may receive
patients who have already been assessed by a
gender service, as is the case in the UK, whilst
in other countries, referrals may go directly to
endocrinologists. This will affect the percentage
diagnosed with gender dysphoria and/or offered
endocrine treatments.

170

Patients accessing medical
pathways
13.19 The numbers of young people receiving
puberty blockers was reported in 21 of the
papers, with the pooled estimates from across
these services being 36% of those referred
(95% confidence interval 23-51%). The ages
at which they received puberty suppression
ranged from 9 to 18, with an average age of 15.
13.20 Across all clinics, 68% received either
puberty blockers and/or masculinising/
feminising hormones, although there was very
wide variability between clinics.
There was neither any information about
what happened to the approximately onethird of patients who did not access an
endocrine pathway, nor any information about
psychological care for those under the care of
the specialist gender service.
13.21 Four studies published since the
systematic review search are of interest, two
from the Netherlands (van der Loos et al., 2023;
van der Loos et al., 2022) and two from the UK
(Butler et al., 2022; Masic et al., 2022).
13.22 In the UK clinic, more birth-registered
female (65%) than birth-registered male (35%)
adolescents were referred to endocrinology
(Masic et al., 2022). Of those adolescents
referred to the endocrinology clinic, 100%
consented to a medical pathway, 98% of whom
were on a puberty blocker pathway and 2%
directly on masculinising/feminising hormones.
The mean age of consenting to puberty blockers
was 15.8. Not all of those who consented went
on to access endocrine treatment.

Clinical approach and clinical management

The second UK paper (Butler et al., 2022)
reported on discharge outcomes; 91.7% of
those discharged continued to identify as
transgender or gender variant, and 86.8% were
discharged to adult GDCs.

Summary - medical pathways

pathways

13.29 Since it is common for people attending
an adult GDC to receive masculinising/
feminising hormones, it is all the more critical
to get follow-up data to better understand the
outcomes for those who are referred to adult
GDCs and those who are not.

13.26 A common theme in examining both the
GIDS and international data is how difficult it
is to understand the different pathways that
young people follow, what alternative options
13.23 In one Dutch study (van der Loos et
are available for those who do not follow a
al., 2023), 882 adolescents received puberty
medical pathway, and the reasons for treatment
blockers, again with higher rates in birth-registered
decisions at all stages along the pathway.
females than males (73% compared to 47%). Of
13.27 The GIDS audit found that 27% of
707 adolescents who received puberty blockers
patients were referred to endocrinology, and
and were eligible for masculinising/feminising
that 89% of patients referred to endocrinology
hormones during follow up 93% progressed to
were discharged to an adult GDC.
treatment. The other Dutch study (van der Loos
et al., 2022) reported a 98% progression from
13.28 Of the 73% of patients not referred to
puberty blockers to hormones.
endocrinology, 69% of these were referred to
an adult GDC.
Patients discontinuing medical
13.24 The care pathways systematic review
(Taylor et al: Care pathways) reported that 0-8%
of patients discontinued puberty suppression
(discussed in Chapter 14) and 0-2 patients
discontinued masculinising/feminising hormones.
13.25 In the two UK studies published since the
University of York’s systematic review search,
there were no discontinuations of masculinising/
feminising hormones in the first UK study
(Masic et al., 2022), but in the second UK study
(Butler et al., 2022) 90 (8.3% of those referred
for medical treatment) stopped identifying as
gender incongruent, and 58 (5.3%) stopped
treatment with either puberty blockers or
masculinising/feminising hormones. However,
the lack of information about length of time to
discharge makes interpretation difficult.

171

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

14. Puberty blockers
14.1 When the Review began, the medical
interventions for gender incongruence/
dysphoria available on the NHS were puberty
blockers, followed by masculinising/feminising
hormones. The history of their use was outlined
in Part 2.

Normal pubertal development

14.3. Puberty is triggered when the
hypothalamus starts a hormone cascade
which results in the ovaries and testes
producing oestrogen and testosterone
respectively. Both males and females proceed
through the 5 stages of puberty known as
Tanner stages.

14.2. Puberty begins between 8 and 13 in girls
(average age 11) and between 9 and14 in boys
(average age 12). The process starts in an area
of the brain called the hypothalamus.
Table 10: Tanner stages
TA N N E R

M A LES

FE M A LES

Stage 1

• No major physical changes yet
• Brain is starting to signal the body to start making changes

Stage 2

• Testes begin to grow
• Public hair around base of penis

• Breast buds, darker nipple
• Small amount of pubic hair

Stage 3

• Penis gets longer
• Thicker pubic hair
• Wet dreams
• Voice starts to change
• Muscles get larger
• Start of growth in height

• Breast buds increase in size
• More pubic hair
• Hair under armpits
• Acne
• Most rapid growth in height
• Start to increase fat on hips and thighs

Stage 4

• Testes, penis and scrotum continue
to grow, scrotum gets darker
• Hair in armpits
• Deeper voice
• Acne
• Most rapid growth in height

• Further breast growth
• First period
• Growth in height slows
• Pubic hair gets thicker

Stage 5

• Testicles, penis, scrotum adult size
• Pubic hair spread to inner thighs
• Facial hair
• Growth in height slows down

• Adult breast size
• Periods more regular
• Adult height
• Hips, thighs, buttocks fill out

172

Clinical approach and clinical management

Rationale for the use of puberty
blockers for gender dysphoria
14.4 As set out in Chapter 2, the practice of
pausing puberty at Tanner Stage 2 was initiated
in the Netherlands, and subsequently adopted in
the UK and internationally. The idea was based
on a theory from Dr Peggy Cohen-Kettenis
whose initial clinical experience was in adult
care. Her rationale was that pausing puberty
early would help young people to ‘pass’ better
in adulthood and ‘extend the diagnostic period’
by buying time to think. The use of puberty
blockers for this purpose was initially reported
in a single case study (Cohen-Kettenis & van
Goozen, 1998) and then in the original Dutch
cohort (de Vries, 2011b).

14.5 It may appear surprising that the novel use
of a drug for this purpose did not require a more
rigorous drug trial. This is because of the way
drugs are licensed and can be used off-label
(see Explanatory box 5).
14.6 GnRH hormones (referred to as puberty
blockers in the treatment of young people) are
licensed for patients with precocious puberty
(that is, young children who enter puberty too
early), as well as for the treatment of some
cancers in adults and some gynaecological
issues in adults. They have undergone
extensive testing for use in precocious
puberty (a very different indication from use in
gender dysphoria) and have met strict safety
requirements to be approved for this condition.

Explanatory Box 5:
Licensing, indications and contraindications
Licences are granted for a drug if strict safety and quality standards are met for its use. In
the UK, licences are granted by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulation Agency
(MHRA).
An indication for a drug is a medical condition that the drug can be used to treat. Drugs
are licensed for specific indications or purposes; for example, semaglutide was originally
licensed for the treatment of diabetes. Recently some brands of semaglutide (Wegovy) have
received additional licensing for weight loss.
If a drug is used for a purpose for which it is not licensed, this means it is being used
off-label. This may be because it is considered to be effective for this indication, but the
manufacturer has not gone through the processes to apply for a licence for that particular
condition. For example, tetracyline, a kind of antibiotic, is licensed for a range of conditions
including acne and rosacea. It is also used to treat Helicobacter pylori, a bacteria that infects
the stomach lining and can cause stomach ulcers, but it is not licensed for that purpose.
Many drugs are not licensed for use in children, but can still be given to them safely. This
is because the trials to test safety were only done in adults, so the licence specifies adult
use only. In these circumstances the drug is usually given to children for exactly the same
reason as for adults (for example, treatment of a severe infection).

173

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

14.7 The situation for the use of puberty
blockers in gender dysphoria is different.
Although some endocrinologists have suggested
that it is possible to extrapolate or generalise
safety information from the use of puberty
blockers in young children with precocious
puberty to use in gender dysphoria, there are
problems in this argument. In the former case,
puberty blockers are blocking hormones that are
abnormally high for, say, a 7-year-old, whereas
in the latter they are blocking the normal rise in
hormones that should be occurring into teenage
years, and which is essential for psychosexual
and other developmental processes.
14.8 This approach to the use of puberty
blockers in gender dysphoria has been an
ongoing source of controversy both nationally
and internationally.
14.9 The lack of consensus across the clinical
community was highlighted by a 2015 study
(Vrouenraets et al., 2015), which approached 17
multi-professional treatment teams worldwide
to determine their views on use of puberty
blockers. They identified seven themes on
which there were widely disparate views:
• the (non-) availability of an explanatory
model for gender dysphoria
• the nature of gender dysphoria (normal
variation, social construct or [mental] illness)
• the role of physiological puberty in
developing gender identity
• the role of comorbidity
• possible physical or psychological effects of
refraining from) early medical interventions
• child competence and decision-making
authority
• the role of social context in how gender
dysphoria is perceived.

174

14.10 The professionals who participated
in the study were often conflicted because
they recognised the distress of young people
and felt the urge to treat them, but at the
same time, most had doubts because of the
lack of information on long-term physical
and psychological outcomes. For several
participants, a reason to use puberty
suppression was the fear of increased suicidality
in untreated adolescents with gender dysphoria.
14.11 The authors of the study concluded
that as long as debate remains on these
seven themes and only limited long-term data
are available, there will be no consensus
on treatment. Eight years later, the position
is unchanged and many of the same
considerations apply to the use of masculinising/
feminising hormones in young people.

International practice
14.12 The synthesis of international guidelines
by the University of York (Hewitt et al:
Guidelines 2: Synthesis) found that there is
no clarity about the treatment aims of puberty
suppression, with options including reducing
gender dysphoria, improving quality of life,
allowing time to make decisions, supporting
gender exploration, extending the diagnostic
phase and ‘passing’ better in adult life.
14.13 Most guidelines emphasise full
reversibility as a justification for their use, whilst
highlighting potential adverse effects on bone
health and uncertainty regarding cognitive
development.
14.14 Where eligibility is discussed, the earlier
requirement to wait for the patient to reach age
12 before they can access puberty blockers
has been removed from some guidelines (for
example, WPATH 8). The majority of guidelines
recommend waiting until a child has reached
Tanner Stage 2 of puberty. The Swedish
guideline recommends Tanner Stage 3.

Clinical approach and clinical management

14.15 There is also considerable variation about
the criteria for starting puberty blockers, with
the commonest being the presence of gender
dysphoria that has emerged or worsened at
puberty. Only two guidelines specified the need
for gender incongruence rather than dysphoria.
Several specified that mental health difficulties
should be managed and/or were unlikely to
impact treatment. Another specification in
several guidelines was that the young person
has decision-making capacity, parental consent
is obtained and/or that there is family social
support.
14.16 The Swedish and Finnish guidelines
differ from others in recommending that
puberty suppression should be provided under
a research protocol or the supervision of a
research clinic.
14.17 The international survey (Hall et al:
Clinic survey) looked at what is happening in
practice. All clinics offered puberty blockers and
masculinising/feminising hormones apart from
one regional service. Menstrual suppression
with progestogens (the contraceptive pill) was
routine in four clinics.
14.18 Most clinics required a diagnosis of
gender dysphoria or incongruence, reaching
Tanner stage 2 and stable mental health for

puberty blockers. Belgium, Finland, Denmark
and Norway required gender dysphoria/
incongruence to have been long-lasting/since
childhood and Finland specified that distress
had to intensify in puberty. Five clinics excluded
those in late puberty from having blockers.

Understanding intended benefits
and risks of puberty blockers
14.19 The systematic review on interventions
to suppress puberty (Taylor et al: Puberty
suppression) provides an update to the
NICE review (2020a). It identified 50 studies
looking at different aspects of gender-related,
psychosocial, physiological and cognitive
outcomes of puberty suppression. Quality was
assessed on a standardised scale. There was
one high quality study, 25 moderate quality
studies and 24 low quality studies. The low
quality studies were excluded from the synthesis
of results.
14.20 A large proportion of the studies only
looked at how well puberty was suppressed
(expected effects) and at side effects, with fewer
looking at the other intended outcomes. There
was evidence from multiple studies that puberty
suppression exerts its expected physiological
effect, and this has never been at issue.

Figure 35: Outcome categories by study quality and design (puberty blockers)

Source: Taylor et al:
Puberty Suppression

175

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Intended benefits
14.21 As set out in Explanatory box 5, an
indication for a drug is the purpose for which it
is prescribed. As the Review has progressed
it has become more difficult to be clear about
the indications for puberty blockers in this
population of young people.
14.22 As explained above, when the Dutch
gender clinic first started using puberty blockers
to pause development in the early stages of
puberty, it was hoped that this would lead to a
better cosmetic outcome for those who went
on to medical transition and would also aid
diagnosis by buying more time for exploration.
Since then, other proposed benefits have been
suggested, including improving dysphoria and
body image, and improving broader aspects of
mental health and wellbeing.
Buying time to think/explore
14.23 The University of York’s systematic
review of care pathways (Taylor et al: Care
pathways) reported that 0-8% of young people
discontinued puberty suppression. Compared
to those who continued with treatment, young
people who discontinued had initiated treatment
at an older age and included a higher proportion
of those with mental health and autism
spectrum conditions. In the gender clinic
with a discontinuation rate of 8% (6 of 73),
median age at start of treatment was 15.2
years (range 15.0-15.6 years) and all were
post-pubertal at presentation.
14.24 In the UK early intervention study
(Carmichael et al., 2021), 98% (43 of 44) of
those who started on puberty suppression
progressed to masculinising/feminising
hormones. A more recent discharge study
(Butler et al., 2022) looked at 1,089 patients
referred from GIDS to the paediatric endocrine
clinic. It showed that 7.4% (16 of 217) of t
hose under 16 at referral discontinued
puberty blockers.
176

14.25 These data suggest that puberty blockers
are not buying time to think, given that the vast
majority of those who start puberty suppression
continue to masculinising/feminising hormones,
particularly if they start earlier in puberty. It was
on the basis of this finding that the High Court
in Bell vs Tavistock suggested that children/
young people would need to understand the
consequences of a full transition pathway in
order to consent to treatment with puberty
blockers ([2020] EWHC 3274 (Admin))..
Reducing gender dysphoria/improving body
satisfaction
14.26 Only two moderate quality studies looked
at gender dysphoria and body satisfaction; the
original Dutch protocol (de Vries et al., 2011b)
and the UK early intervention study (Carmichael
et al., 2021). Neither reported any change
before or after receiving puberty suppression.
Psychological and mental health
improvements
14.27 As outlined in Chapter 2, the original
Dutch protocol (de Vries et al., 2011b) found
improvements in mental health in a pre-post
study without a comparison group, but the GIDS
early intervention study (Carmichael et al., 2021)
did not replicate this finding. The systematic
review on interventions to suppress puberty
(Taylor et al: Puberty suppression) identified
one other good quality study (van der Miesen
et al., 2020), which produced an intermediate
result with improvements in some mental health
measures but not others.
14.28 The University of York concluded that
there is insufficient and/or inconsistent evidence
about the effects of puberty suppression on
psychological or psychosocial health. This is in
line with the finding of the NICE review (2020)
and other systematic reviews, apart from the
systematic review commissioned by WPATH
(Baker et al., 2021), which reported some
benefit. However, in the latter systematic review,

Clinical approach and clinical management

eight of the 12 studies reporting psychological
outcomes were rated as low quality, which may
explain the difference.
14.29 It is often the case that when an
intervention is given outside a randomised
control trial (RCT), a large treatment effect is
seen, which sometimes disappears when an
RCT is conducted. This is especially the case
when there is a strong belief that the treatment
is effective. The fact that only very modest
and inconsistent results were seen in relation
to improvements in mental health, even in
the studies that reported some psychological
benefits of treatment with puberty blockers,
makes it all the more important to assess
whether other treatments may have a greater
effect on the distress that young people with
gender dysphoria are suffering during puberty.
Cosmetic outcomes/‘passing’ in adult life
14.30 The Multi-Professional Review Group
(MPRG) request a letter from young people
being put forward for puberty blockers so they
can ensure that they hear the young person’s
voice and understand their aspirations. The
MPRG have now reviewed approximately
200 such letters. As explained in Chapter 12,
many young people are living ‘in stealth’ and
consequently often in a state of considerable
anxiety about developing pubertal changes that
may ‘out’ them to their friends. However, since
most young people are not starting puberty
blockers until the age of 15 and above, it is
unclear how helpful they might be in maintaining
stealth, particularly for birth-registered girls who
will often be in the later stages of puberty by
that time.

14.31 In the longer-term, being able to ‘pass’ is
of great importance to some transgender adults,
and not to others. Although there is a lack of
long-term outcome data for children and young
people in adult life, the Review team has been
able to talk to both young people and older
adults about their experience of early access
to puberty blockers. This has been particularly
important for the transgender women, who
were able to access puberty blockers before
developing facial hair and dropping their voice.
14.32 In terms of helping young people to
‘pass’ in adult life, an important question is what
impact puberty blockers might have on adult
height for those who subsequently go on to
masculinising/feminising hormones. Evidence
to date suggests that puberty blockers neither
lead to substantially reduced adult height in
transgender females (Boogers et al., 2022), nor
increased eventual height in transgender males
(Loi-Koe et al., 2018). This is an important issue
for further research.

Risks
14.33 When the use of puberty blockers
was introduced by the Dutch clinic, the
target population was patients who had been
gender incongruent since childhood. Prior
to the introduction of puberty blockers, the
clinical experience of that group suggested
that although in the vast majority the gender
incongruence resolved by puberty, for those
for whom persisted into puberty, a long-term
transgender identity was more likely.
14.34 For the more recently presenting
population of predominantly birth-registered
females who develop gender dysphoria in early
to mid-puberty, there is even less understanding
of what in medical terms is called the ‘natural
history’ of their gender dysphoria (that is, what
would happen without medical intervention).
Because an intervention intended for one
group of young people (predominantly pre
pubertal birth-registered males) has been
177

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

14.39 The University of York’s systematic
review identified one cross-sectional study that
measured executive functioning. This found
no difference between adolescents who were
treated with puberty blockers for less than one
14.35 Earlier, this Report set out the very
year compared to those not treated, but found
complex events that take place in the
worse executive functioning in those treated
adolescent brain during puberty. Neuroscientists
for more than one year compared to those not
believe that these changes are driven by a
treated.
combination of chronological age and sex
hormones. Blocking the release of these sex
14.40 A recent review of the literature on this
hormones could have a range of unintended
topic found very limited research on the short-,
and as yet unidentified consequences.
medium- or longer-term impact of puberty
blockers on neurocognitive development
Altering the trajectory of development of
(Baxendale, 2024).
sexuality and gender identity
Impact on subsequent genital surgery
14.36 Adolescence is a time of overall identity
given to a different group, it is hard to know
what percentage of these young people might
have resolved their gender-related distress in a
variety of other ways.

development, sexual development, sexual
fluidity and experimentation.

14.37 Blocking this experience means that
young people have to understand their identity
and sexuality based only on their discomfort
about puberty and a sense of their gender
identity developed at an early stage of the
pubertal process. Therefore, there is no way of
knowing whether the normal trajectory of the
sexual and gender identity may be permanently
altered.
Impact on neurocognitive development
14.38 A further concern, already shared with
NHS England (July 2022) (Appendix 6), is that
adolescent sex hormone surges may trigger
the opening of a critical period for experiencedependent rewiring of neural circuits underlying
executive function (i.e. maturation of the part
of the brain concerned with planning, decision
making and judgement). If this is the case, brain
maturation may be temporarily or permanently
disrupted by the use of puberty blockers, which
could have a significant impact on the young
person’s ability to make complex risk-laden
decisions, as well as having possible longerterm neuropsychological consequences.
178

14.41 If puberty suppression is started too
early in birth-registered males it can make
subsequent vaginoplasty (creation of a vagina
and vulva) more difficult due to inadequate
penile growth. In some transgender females
this has necessitated the use of gut in place of
penile tissue, which has a higher risk of
surgical complications.

14.42 A recent paper suggests that for
transgender females it is recommended to wait
until Tanner Stage 4 to allow adequate penile
growth for vaginoplasty (Lee et al., 2023).
Other physical health impacts
14.43 Multiple studies included in the
systematic review of puberty suppression
(Taylor et al.: Puberty suppressants) found that
bone density is compromised during puberty
suppression, and height gain may lag behind
that seen in other adolescents. However, much
longer-term follow-up is needed to determine
whether there is full bone health recovery
in adulthood, both in those who go on to
masculinising/feminising hormones and those
who do not.

Clinical approach and clinical management

14.44 The same is true of other short-term
physical effects of puberty suppression, with
little knowledge about whether it leads to any
long-term effects, such as on metabolic health
and weight.

14.50 It is important not to lose sight of
the fact that hormonal surges are a normal
part of puberty and are known to lead to
mood fluctuations and depression, the latter
particularly in girls.

Prolonged exposure to puberty suppression

14.51 It is not unexpected that blocking these
surges may dampen distress and improve
psychological functioning in the short-term in
some young people, but this may not be an
appropriate response to pubertal discomfort.

14.45 Puberty suppression was never intended
to continue for extended periods, so the
complex circumstances in which young people
may remain on puberty blockers into adulthood
is of concern. In some instances, it appears that
young adults are reluctant to stop taking puberty
blockers, either because they wish to continue
as non-binary, or because of ongoing indecision
about proceeding to masculinising or feminising
hormones. For others, there may have been a
delay in adult services taking over their care.

Summary - puberty blockers
14.46 There are many reports that puberty
blockers are beneficial in reducing mental
distress and improving the wellbeing of children
and young people with gender dysphoria, but
as demonstrated by the systematic review the
quality of these studies is poor.
14.47 The Review has heard that the
widespread claims that puberty blockers reduce
the risk of death by suicide in this population
may place pressure on families to obtain private
treatment.
14.48 The Review has also heard from GPs
who have been put under pressure to continue
prescribing such treatments on the basis that
failing to do so will put young people at risk of
suicide.
14.49 The University of York systematic review
found no evidence that puberty blockers
improve body image or dysphoria, and very
limited evidence for positive mental health
outcomes, which without a control group
could be due to placebo effect or concomitant
psychological support.

14.52 Conversely, a known side effect of
puberty blockers on mood is that it may reduce
psychological functioning. This variability in
individual response to predicted physiological
effects is reflected in the secondary analysis of
the GIDS early intervention study (McPherson &
Freedman, 2023).
14.53 The very strongly held beliefs amongst
some young people and parents/carers that
puberty blockers are highly efficacious may be
attributed to a number of factors:
• the support for this position in published
papers and from some clinicians working in
the field
• signposted information and advice provided
to children, young people and their families
on the perceived benefits, including on
social media
• the fact that puberty blockers have come to
be seen as the entry point into and start of
a transgender treatment pathway
• a lack of information about the limitations of
the evidence base
• the lack of other options offered to address
symptoms of distress and bodily discomfort.

179

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

14.54 The focus on puberty blockers and
beliefs about their efficacy has arguably meant
that other treatments (and medications) have not
been studied/developed to support this group,
doing the children and young people a further
disservice.
14.55 Studies should evaluate whether simple
measures such as stopping periods with the
contraceptive pill have the potential to manage
immediate distress, as well as other more
conventional evidence-based techniques for
managing depression, anxiety and dysphoria.
None of these alternative approaches preclude
continuing on a transition pathway, but they
may be more effective measures for short-term
management of distress.
14.56 Transgender males masculinise well on
testosterone, so there is no obvious benefit
of puberty blockers in helping them to ‘pass’
in later life, particularly if the use of puberty
blockers does not lead to an increase in adult
height.
14.57 For transgender females, there is
benefit in stopping irreversible changes such
as lower voice and facial hair. This has to be
balanced against adequacy of penile growth for
vaginoplasty, leaving a small window of time to
achieve both these aims.
14.58 In summary, there seems to be a
very narrow indication for the use of puberty
blockers in birth-registered males as the start
of a medical transition pathway in order to stop
irreversible pubertal changes. Other indications
remain unproven at this time.

180

Clinical approach and clinical management

181

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

15. Masculinising/feminising
hormones
15.1 The use of masculinising/feminising
hormones in transgender adults was pioneered
by Magnus Hirshfield in the first half of the 20th
century. It is a well-established practice that
has transformed the lives of many transgender
people.

of life and satisfaction with gender transition
including sexual functioning?

International practice

15.6 The University of York’s synthesis
of commissioned guidelines (Hewitt et al:
Guidelines 2: Synthesis) found that almost
15.2 Treatment with masculinising/feminising
hormones is not without long-term problems and all international guidelines discuss the use of
masculinising/feminising hormones.
side effects, but for those who have undergone
a successful transition, the physical costs
15.7 Most require that gender dysphoria or
are dramatically outweighed by the long-term
incongruence has persisted over time and
benefits.
that an individual has the capacity to consent
to taking these hormones as part of their
15.3 The use of masculinising/feminising
treatment. Most also reference age 16 as a
hormone in those under age 18 is a more
typical starting point, but a smaller number
recent development that started in the late
specify this as a minimum age.
twentieth century (Carswell et al., 2022), so is
less well understood. As set out in Part 3, it
is not the practice of masculinising/feminising
hormones that has changed more recently, but
the heterogeneous population of people seeking
this treatment.
15.4 Studies looking at outcomes of those
taking masculinising/feminising hormones are
not straightforward. As is the case with puberty
blockers, the desired effects - in this case
masculinisation/feminisation - are predictable
and well understood. Understanding side effects
and longer-term complications are important for
the health of the transgender community, but
in terms of patient choice are unlikely to have a
major impact on treatment decisions.
15.5 The key questions are therefore, what are
the short- and long-term outcomes in terms of
mental health, psychosocial functioning, quality

182

15.8 In some guidelines, other requirements
are that mental health difficulties are managed/
unlikely to impact treatment. Some guidelines
require parental consent and/or family/social
support.
15.9 Only the Swedish and Finnish guidelines
recommend that hormone treatment is given
under a research framework or in exceptional
circumstances.
15.10 The majority of guidelines recommend
providing information on the impact of hormones
and surgery on fertility, and fertility preservation
measures.
15.11 The Swedish and WPATH guidelines
mention the need to support those who
discontinue treatment or detransition, but no
detail is provided on how this should
be managed.

Clinical approach and clinical management

15.12 Most guidelines recommend that gender
is viewed as a spectrum, but only three discuss
treatment for those who identify as non-binary.
The Swedish and Norwegian guidelines do
not recommend hormone treatments in this
group due to lack of evidence, whilst WPATH
recommends providing tailored hormones
treatments in a separate chapter on non-binary
people, rather than in the adolescent chapter,
so it is unclear if this applies to adults only or
includes adolescents.
15.13 The international survey (Hall et al: Clinic
survey) found that in practice most gender
clinics require stable mental health in those
prescribed masculinising/feminising hormones.
Some clinics have no minimum ages, and the
range for those that do is 14-16. There is also
variation in the required duration of gender
dysphoria, ranging from since childhood to longlasting/permanent and stable, or stable over
two years.

15.14 Most gender clinics provide access to
fertility preservation services.

Understanding the evidence
15.15 In addition to the systematic review on
care pathways (Taylor et al: Care pathways)
discussed in Chapter 13, the University of
York conducted a systematic review of the
use of masculinising/feminising hormones in
adolescents with gender dysphoria (Taylor et al:
Masculinising/feminising hormones).
This systematic review aimed to synthesise
the evidence for gender-related, psychosocial,
physiological or cognitive outcomes for the
use of feminising/masculinising hormones
in adolescents with gender
dysphoria/incongruence.

Figure 36: Outcome categories by study quality and design (masculinising/feminising
hormones)

Source: Taylor et al: M/F hormones

183

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

15.16 A total of 53 studies met the inclusion
criteria. The most frequently reported outcomes
were adverse physical health outcomes and
the intended development of puberty in the
identified gender. A smaller number of studies
looked at side effects in relation to bone health
and fertility.
15.17 Psychological/mental health was
measured in 15 studies, psychosocial in
seven, and cognitive outcomes in four. Gender
dysphoria and body satisfaction were each
measured in three studies.
15.18 The only high-quality study identified by
the systematic review was one that looked at
side effects. All the rest were moderate or low
quality.
15.19 The studies had many methodological
problems including the selective inclusion of
patients, lack of representativeness of the
population, and in many of the studies there
were no comparison groups. Where there was a
comparison group, most studies did not control
for key differences between groups.
15.20 As expected, hormone treatment induced
puberty in the desired gender. Inconsistent
results were found for height/growth, bone
health and cardiometabolic health. Evidence
relating to gender dysphoria, body satisfaction,
psychosocial and cognitive outcomes was
insufficient to draw clear conclusions. No study
assessed fertility in birth-registered females.
15.21 There was moderate quality evidence
from mainly pre-post studies that hormone
treatment may improve psychological health in
the short-term.
15.22 There were inconsistencies regarding
suicidality and/or self-harm, with three of four
studies reporting an improvement and one
no change.

184

15.23 A significant weakness of the studies
evaluating psychological or psychosocial
function was the short follow-up interval, with
many following-up for less than 1 year, and a
smaller number for up to 3 years.
15.24 The University of York also looked at
studies published since the original search
for the systematic review. Two further studies
were reported, which added to the moderate
quality evidence that hormones may improve
psychological health.
15.25 Overall, the systematic review authors
concluded that: “There is a lack of high-quality
research assessing the outcomes of hormone
interventions in adolescents with gender
dysphoria/incongruence, and few studies that
undertake long-term follow up. No conclusions
can be drawn about the effect on gender
dysphoria, body satisfaction, psychosocial
health, cognitive development, or fertility.
Uncertainty remains about the outcomes for
height/growth, cardiometabolic and bone health.
There is suggestive evidence from mainly
pre-post studies that hormone treatment may
improve psychological health although robust
research with long-term follow-up is needed”.
This is in line with other systematic reviews
published previously (Ludvigsson et al., 2023).

Key considerations
Mental health and
psychosocial outcomes
15.26 It is not just the methodological issues
highlighted that make it hard to draw firm
conclusions about the role of masculinising/
feminising hormones in mental health and
psychosocial outcomes. There are important
clinical considerations that complicate
the picture.

Clinical approach and clinical management

15.27 When a young person has been on
puberty blockers, a short-term boost in mental
wellbeing is to be expected when sex hormones
are introduced. Testosterone is faster to
produce physical changes than oestrogen,
and birth-registered girls can expect to start
seeing body changes in line with their identified
gender within a few months. The start of long
anticipated physical changes would be expected
to improve mood, at least in the short term,
and it is perhaps surprising that there is not
a greater effect size. However, much longerterm follow-up is needed to understand the full
psychological impact of medical transition.
15.28 Discussions in Chapter 11 touched on
whether mental health problems may be caused
by gender dysphoria and minority stress or
whether in some instances a range of adverse
childhood experiences and stressors could
lead to gender-related distress. Regardless of
causality, the focus should be on treating all the
young person’s needs, rather than expecting
that hormone treatment alone will address
longstanding mental ill health.
15.29 This point is illustrated in a recent
Australian paper (Elkadi et al., 2023), which
reviewed outcomes of a clinic cohort of young
people 4-9 years post presentation. At initial
assessment 70 of 79 (88.6%) received comorbid
mental health diagnoses or displayed other
indicators of psychological distress. A diagnosis
of gender dysphoria was received by 68 young
people who were deemed eligible for a genderaffirming pathway. Of these, six stopped medical
treatment, three while on puberty blockers
alone and three after starting on masculinising/
feminising hormones. Where follow-up data
were available, ongoing mental health concerns
were reported by 44 of 50 participants (88.0%),
and educational/occupational outcomes
varied widely.

15.30 Recent national register-based studies
from Finland and Denmark have been published
that examine mental health needs of people
presenting to specialist gender services before
and after treatment. Using data from a national
health register is a much more robust way of
capturing total population data. Both studies
compared those presenting to the gender
services with age-matched controls.
15.31 The Danish national register-based study
of 3,812 transgender people examined a range
of outcomes in routine health records compared
to age-matched controls (Glintborg et al., 2023).
This was a mixed group of adults and children/
young people. Follow-up was a maximum of 10
years after diagnosis.
15.32 At baseline, transgender persons were
five times more likely than controls to have
mental health disorders. The proportion of
transgender persons with a prescription for
psychopharmacological agents (medications
to treat mental health) increased from less
than 20% at baseline to more than 30% during
follow-up. After the first year of treatment, there
was a decreasing trend for the risk of mental
and behavioural disorders in transgender
persons, but they still remained at higher risk
than controls throughout follow-up, especially
transgender persons registered male at birth.
15.33 This demonstrates how difficult it is to
separate out and understand the impact of
the various elements of care; for example,
the extent to which psychopharmacological
treatments improve mental health, and how
much of the improvements is a result of genderaffirming treatment.

185

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

15.34 The Finnish paper (Russka et al., 2024)
identified 3,665 individuals between 1996 and
2019. Again, this was a mixed group of children,
young people and adults. The gender dysphoria
group had received many times more specialistlevel psychiatric treatments, both before and
after contacting gender services, than their
matched controls. There was also a marked
increase over time in psychiatric needs in 20162019 compared to 1996-2000. The need for
psychiatric support persisted, regardless of
gender-affirming treatment.
15.35 In summary, both young people and
adults presenting with gender dysphoria often
have complex additional mental health needs.
It is hard to know the extent to which hormone
treatment mitigates these issues, and the
role played by treatment and support in the
additional ongoing mental health issues.

Suicidality
15.36 As discussed in Part 3, it is well
established that children and young people
with gender dysphoria are at increased risk
of suicide, but suicide risk appears to be
comparable to other young people with a
similar range of mental health and psychosocial
challenges. Some clinicians feel under
pressure to support a medical pathway based
on widespread reporting that gender-affirming
treatment reduces suicide risk. This conclusion
was not supported by the above systematic
review.
15.37 Commonly suggested reasons for the
suicidality in the gender diverse population are:
• the inherent distress from the gender
dysphoria
• minority stress due to discrimination and
bullying
• distress caused by delayed access to
medical treatment

186

• underlying co-occurring mental health
problems that are common in the
population.
15.38 A systematic review of suicide-related
outcomes following gender-affirming treatment
(Jackson, 2023) reported that in a majority
of studies there was a reduction in suicidality
following gender-affirming treatment. However,
there were major methodological problems in
most of the studies, with the biggest problem
being a failure to adequately control for the
presence of psychiatric comorbidity and
treatment, such that no firm conclusions could
be drawn.
15.39 A UK paper (Lavender et al., 2023)
reporting a retrospective analysis of 38 children
who had received puberty blockers followed
by masculinising/feminising hormones noted
that suicidality and self-harm showed a general
decrease. However, there had been 109 eligible
participants, and of the 38 included in the study
only 11 had completed the suicidality/self-harm
questions, rendering this observation flawed.
15.40 The authors of a paper reporting on
psychosocial outcomes of 315 young people
treated with masculinising/feminising hormones
(Chen et al., 2023) stated that the most common
adverse event was suicidal ideation (11
participants [3.5%]) and two participants
[0.6%] died by suicide. Suicidality at baseline
was one of the exclusion criteria for this study.
15.41 A paper from the Belgium gender clinic
reported five deaths by suicide among 177
adolescents clients aged 12-18 years who were
seen between 2007 and 2016 (Van Cauwenberg
et al., 2021) All five had commenced on
masculinising/feminising hormones.
15.42 Another recent paper (Ruuska, 2024),
compared deaths by suicide in young people
who had been seen in the Finnish national
gender service with age-matched controls.
The study also did not find a statistically

Clinical approach and clinical management

significant link between hormone treatment and
reduced risk of suicide. However, there was
a statistically significant relationship between
a high rate of co-occurring mental health
difficulties and increased suicide. Because
suicides were fortunately very rare events,
regardless of transition status, it is hard to draw
firm conclusions from this study.
15.43 In summary, the evidence does not
adequately support the claim that genderaffirming treatment reduces suicide risk.
However, the distress is real for these
children and young people, some of whom
hold strong beliefs about the efficacy of both
puberty blockers and masculinising/feminising
hormones. This will be exacerbated by long
waits to be seen in specialist gender services
with only internet and peer group sources of
support and information, and without access to
clinical advice on the range of available options to
manage their distress. Thus, fear that delayed
access to medical treatment may lead to
suicidal thoughts and behaviours remains high
in parents and clinicians, and this is regardless
of how effective the treatments may be once
accessed.

Detransition
15.44 The term detransition is generally
used to describe people who have previously
medically/surgically transitioned and then
reverted to their birth registered gender. It is not
necessarily applied to those who have a period
of trans identification, potentially with a social
transition, and later revert to live as their birthregistered gender. This tends to be referred to
as ‘desistance’.

15.45 During the lifetime of the Review, the
term trans has moved from being a quite narrow
definition to being applied as an umbrella term
to a broader spectrum of gender diversity. This
clearly has implications for conceptualisations
of detransition.
15.46 Narratives around detransition and
regret have become increasingly fraught and
weaponised in the time since the Review
started. Initially, the Review heard from those
who strongly support gender-affirming care and
contested that cases are vanishingly rare and
are mostly a response to lack of acceptance
and minority stress.
15.47 Over time there has been an increasing
acceptance that people choose to detransition
for many reasons. The term has been rebadged
by some as ‘retransition’. Some young adults
who have detransitioned have told the Review
that they would not want their experience to be
used to invalidate that of other people.

“I felt like it wasn’t, you know, acceptable to
go back. It wasn’t a thing to go back, you
know. It wasn’t something that was talked
about. It didn’t feel like an option that they
wanted to discuss or even mention […] I
want detransition to be something that can
be openly talked about, and regret to be
openly talked about.”
Young person
University of York Qualitative Summary

187

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

15.48 Young people may also choose to stop
hormone treatment but carry on identifying as
transgender or non-binary.
15.49 A retrospective case note review from an
NHS adult GDC (Hall et al., 2021) reported on
the outcomes of 175 consecutively discharged
service users;12 cases (6.9%) met the criteria
for detransitioning, and a further six had some
ongoing uncertainties about their gender
identities or treatment goals.

15.51 One primary care audit from a multi-site
general practice sited near a university (Boyd et
al., 2022) reported on a cohort of 68 patients at
various stages along the gender pathway with a
mean age 27.8 years. Of 41 patients who were
started on hormones, eight (20%) chose to stop
after a mean period of 5 years (range 17 months
to 10 years). These comprised six trans men
and two trans women.

15.52 Regardless of the numbers who
detransition, reasons for detransition are
15.50 Estimates of the percentage of individuals
complex, and there is a lack of adequate service
who embark on a medical pathway and
provision for this group of individuals who have
subsequently have regrets or detransition are
a range of physical and psychological needs.
hard to determine from GDC clinic data alone.
There are several reasons for this:
15.53 A self-identified sample of 100
detransitioners (Littman, 2021) completed an
• those who do detransition may not choose
anonymous online questionnaire. Of these,
to return to the gender clinic and are hence
69% were birth-registered females and 31%
lost to follow-up
were birth-registered males. A range of
• the Review has heard from a number of
issues were reported prior to onset of gender
clinicians working in adult gender services
dysphoria, including diagnosis of mental illness,
that the time to detransition ranges from
neurodiversity, a history of trauma or self5-10 years, so follow-up intervals on studies injury. Reasons for detransition were diverse
on medical treatment are too short to
and included individuals becoming more
capture this
comfortable in their natal sex, being concerned
about medical complications of transitioning,
• the inflection point for the increase in
that mental health did not improve during
presentations to gender services for
transitioning, being dissatisfied with physical
children and young people was 2014, so
results, and discovering gender dysphoria was
even studies with longer follow-up intervals
caused by something specific such as trauma
will not capture the outcomes of this more
or abuse. Homophobia or difficulty accepting
recent cohort.
themselves as lesbian, gay or bisexual was
expressed by 23.0% as a reason for transition
and subsequent detransition.

188

Clinical approach and clinical management

Figure 37: Self-reported reasons for detransitioning
70%

Realised that my gender dysphoria was related to other issues

62%

Health concerns

50%

Transition did not help with my disphoria

45%

Found alternatives to deal with my disphoria

44%

Unhappy with the social changes

43%

Change in political views

34%

Dysphoria resolved itself over time
Co-morbid mental health issues related to dysphoria solved

30%

Unhappy with physical changes

30%

Lack of support from social surrounings

13%

Financial concerns

12%

Discrimination

10%

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Source: Vandenbussche, E. (2021). Detransition-related needs and support: A cross-sectional online survey. Journal of
Homosexuality, 69(9), 1602–1620. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2021.1919479. Published with
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

15.54 Figure 37 shows some of the reasons
given for detransitioning in response to a crosssectional online survey of 237 self-identified
participants (Vandenbussche, 2022).

experiences, alexithymia (inability to recognise
and express their emotions) and problems with
interoception (making sense of what is going
on in their bodies) were identified in the audit,
and this audit would be informative for clinicians
15.55 An audit was undertaken at The Tavistock assessing young people with a view to starting
and Portman GDC on the characteristics
masculinising/feminising hormones. The Review
of individuals who had detransitioned. Most
asked to have access to this audit in order to
papers on detransition are based on community understand some of the qualitative findings, but
samples, and questionnaire reports, but this
the trust did not agree to this.
was a case series of 40 patients who had all
been examined by a psychiatrist.
Long-term outcomes
15.56 Findings from the audit were discussed
with the Review. The time for people to choose
to detransition was 5-10 years (average 7
years). Common presenting features and risk
factors such as high levels of adverse childhood

15.57 One of the major difficulties with planning
interventions for children and young people is
the very limited evidence on the longer-term
outcomes for people who have accessed GIDS.

189

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

15.58 When clinicians talk to patients about
which interventions may be best for them, they
usually talk about the longer-term benefits and
risks of different options, based on outcome
data from other people who have been through
a similar care pathway. This information is not
currently available for interventions in children
and young people with gender incongruence or
gender dysphoria, so young people and their
families have to make decisions without an
adequate picture of the potential impacts and
outcomes.
15.59 A strand of the research the Review
commissioned from the University of York
was a data linkage study. The study aimed to
use existing data held by the NHS, including
data from GIDS, hospital wards, outpatient
clinics, emergency departments and NHS
adult GDCs, to track the journeys of all young
people (approximately 9,000) referred to the
GIDS service through the system to provide a
population-level evidence base of the different
pathways people take and the outcomes.  
15.60 This type of research is usual practice
in the NHS when looking to improve health
services and care received. However, this
has not been the case for gender-questioning
children and young people and the hope was
that this data linkage would go some way to
redress this imbalance.
15.61 The study received ethics approval from
the Health Research Authority (HRA), a process
that took over a year. While the methodology
proposed for the research is not particularly
unusual, the robust scrutiny and consideration
its Research Ethics Committee (REC) and
Confidentiality Advisory Committee (CAG)
applied to the study was entirely appropriate
given the sensitivity of the subject matter.

190

15.62 The University of York undertook
stakeholder engagement and developed the
patient notifications and communications
resources to explain the research and provide
information about how to opt-out of the study
should an individual choose to do so. It was at
the point of trying to launch the 3-month opt-out
period that the NHS gender clinics indicated
their unwillingness to participate.
15.63 In January 2024, the Review received
a letter (Appendix 11) from NHS England
stating that, despite efforts to encourage
the participation of the NHS gender clinics,
the necessary co-operation had not been
forthcoming.
15.64 This research represents a unique
opportunity to provide further evidence to assist
young people, their parents/carers and the
clinicians working with them to make informed
decisions about the right pathway for them.
15.65 Although retrospective research is
never as robust as prospective research, a
prospective study would take a minimum of
10-15 years to extract the necessary
follow-up data.
15.66 NHS England in its letter has committed
to realising the ambitions of this study beyond
the life of the Review. As a single integrated
health service, which for the period in question
had one provider of specialist gender care for
children and young people, the NHS offers a
world leading opportunity to look at outcomes
for c.9000 patients and add to the evidence
base.
15.67 NHS England will take over responsibility
for this work and the NHS National Research
Oversight Board for Children and Young
People’s Gender Services will support the task.

Clinical approach and clinical management

15.68 NHS England asked the Review for
details on the circumstances that led the
University of York to reach the conclusion that
it was not yet possible to move ahead with
the next stages of the data linkage study and
specific recommendations for moving forward.
The Review wrote to NHS England in March
2024 (Appendix 12).

Recommendation 5:
NHS England, working with DHSC
should direct the gender clinics to
participate in the data linkage study
within the lifetime of the current
statutory instrument. NHS England’s
Research Oversight Board should
take responsibility for interpreting
the findings of the research.

191

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

16. Challenges in
clinical decision making
16.1 There was considerable public interest
in the Bell v Tavistock case referenced in
Chapter 2, which focused on competence/
capacity of the child or young person to consent
to medical treatments. However, this is only
part of the process of decision making about
treatment options.

16.2 The clinician must first decide what
treatments options are appropriate/clinically
indicated, and then provide the information that
the patient needs in order to make an informed
decision about the options offered.

Figure 38: Informed consent

Informed
consent

Information
given

Intended
benefits

Risks/
side effects
Outcome
data

Evidence

Options
oﬀered

Clinical indication
for treatment

Reproducible
assessment
Best
interests

192

Capacity or
competence

Clinical approach and clinical management

16.3 General Medical Council (GMC) guidance
(GMC, 2020) states that in order to inform that
joint decision-making process “the clinician
must make an assessment of the patient’s
health and be satisfied that any medicine or
treatment they offer is clinically indicated (i.e.
that in their reasonable professional judgement,
a medical procedure or treatment is suitable and
useful to reach a specific therapeutic goal with a
certain probability)”.
16.4 In addition, the clinician is responsible
for recommending and providing effective
treatments based on the best available
evidence. GMC guidance (GMC, 2021) makes
it clear that doctors are responsible for any
prescriptions they provide and accountable for
their decisions and actions when supplying or
administering medicines. ‘Prescribing’ is used
to describe many related activities, not just
prescription medicines. For example, it can
also include activities such as exercise, and
it may also be used to describe any written
information or advice that is given to patients;
thus, in the context of gender services, this
could reasonably be deemed to apply to any
advice ranging from social transition to hormone
treatments.
16.5 There are multiple problems in making
these judgements in this complex area of
healthcare.

Assessing whether a treatment
is clinically indicated
16.6 As discussed in Chapters 9 and 10,
international guidelines on assessment
of children and young people with gender
incongruence or dysphoria lack clarity
about purpose, content or duration. Formal
assessment tools have not been adequately
validated.

16.7 Although the most cited reasons for
carrying out an assessment are to inform a care
plan or assess eligibility for endocrine treatment,
few guidelines provide detail about operational
criteria for eligibility for puberty blockers or
masculinising/feminising hormonal prescriptions.
The Review was unable to obtain clear criteria
from the GIDS team on their criteria for referral
for endocrine intervention.
16.8 A formal diagnosis of gender dysphoria is
frequently cited as a prerequisite for accessing
hormone treatment. However, it is not reliably
predictive of whether that young person will
have longstanding gender incongruence in the
future, or whether medical intervention will be
the best option for them. Depending on what
has caused their distress or dysphoria, it may
be resolved by medical treatment, but it may
also be resolved in other ways.
16.9 As discussed in Chapter 8, the nature
and causes of gender dysphoria/incongruence
are complex and poorly understood, and there
is very limited understanding of the currently
presenting population of predominantly birthregistered adolescent females. Each individual
will have a different mix of biopsychosocial
factors, but if potentially dynamic psychosocial
or sociocultural factors predominate in a
significant proportion of people, one of the most
challenging ethical questions is whether and/
or when medical intervention is the correct
response.
16.10 As set out in the section on brain
development, maturation continues into a
person’s mid-20s, and through this period
gender and sexual identity may continue to
evolve, along with sexual experience. Priorities
and experiences through this period are likely to
change, and this was reflected in the differences
in feedback from young adults compared to
teenagers. Furthermore, the Review heard
accounts from young adults and parents

193

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

about young people who felt certain about a
binary gender identity in teenage years and
then became more fluid in young adulthood or
reverted to their birth-registered gender.
16.11 For these reasons, many clinicians
who the Review has spoken to nationally and
internationally have stated that they are unable
to reliably predict which children/young people
will transition successfully and which might
regret or detransition at a later date.
16.12 Some commentators suggest that since
there is no evidence that gender assessments
can reliably predict or prevent detransition/
regret better than self-reported gender identity
and embodiment goals, services should adopt
an ‘informed consent’ model of care. In this
context, this means de-emphasising gender
assessments in favour of offering genderaffirming interventions based primarily or solely
on the person’s informed decision (Ashley et al.,
2023). This would also be in line with the views
of some service users who see the assessment
process as intrusive and ‘gatekeeping’.
16.13 However, this is not an approach that
would be compatible with GMC guidance with
regard to the responsibilities of prescribers
(GMC, 2021) or for the safeguarding of minors
(GMC, 2018).

16.15 In addition to this making it difficult for
clinicians to know whether these are appropriate
treatments to offer, it is also challenging to
provide children, young people and families
with sufficient information on which to make an
informed choice.
16.16 Montgomery makes it clear that clinicians
must not merely disclose information but also
take reasonable care to ensure that patients
are aware of material risks ([2015] UKSC 11)..
This is an active responsibility that involves
assessing what the patient has understood.
16.17 This duty applies not just to the
recommended treatments but also to any
reasonable alternatives or treatments. This
means that it would not be enough to discuss
endocrine options, but also other non-endocrine
options, as well as the pros and cons of
delaying endocrine intervention.
16.18 The duty of information disclosure is
complicated by many ‘unknown unknowns’
about the long-term impacts of puberty blockers
and/or masculinising/feminising hormone during
a dynamic developmental period when gender
identity may not be settled.

16.19 For example, when young people
commence on the hormones of their identified
gender after a period of puberty suppression,
they start to experience a sense of libido and
a change in their physical appearance. Many
16.14 The University of York’s systematic
report a period of ‘gender euphoria’. This makes
reviews demonstrated poor study design,
it surprising that the observed improvements
inadequate follow-up periods and a lack of
in psychological functioning in the first year of
objectivity in reporting of results. As a result,
masculinising/feminising hormones are relatively
the evidence for the indicated uses of puberty
modest. Their experience of puberty will then
blockers and masculinising/feminising hormones be based on their identified gender, which may
in adolescents are unproven and benefits/harms have permanent neuropsychological effects.
are unknown.

Best evidence and information

194

Clinical approach and clinical management

16.20 For birth-registered females, the impact
of testosterone will give a higher sex drive
than they might have experienced during their
biological puberty, and after one year will result
in robust increases in muscle mass and strength
(while birth-registered males will maintain their
muscle strength) (Wiik et al., 2020). In the
absence of any experience as an adult ciswoman, they may have no frame of reference
to cause them to regret or detransition, but at
the same time they may have had a different
outcome without medical intervention and would
not have needed to take life-long hormones.
16.21 There is no information on the natural
history (that is, untreated trajectories) of the
current cohort of predominantly birth-registered
females presenting in early adolescence
because endocrine interventions have been
initiated.
16.22 Tragically deaths by suicide in trans
people of all ages continue to be above the
national average, but there is no evidence that
gender-affirmative treatments reduce this. Such
evidence as is available suggests that these
deaths are related to a range of other complex
psychosocial factors and to mental illness.
16.23 This raises the question of whether,
for those who are in late adolescence and not
on puberty blockers, managing any mental
health problems, ensuring participation in
education or work, supporting social transition
and organising fertility preservation if required
are more pressing issues than commencing
masculinising/feminising hormones.
16.24 All of these difficult questions make
provision of sound information and properly
informed consent very challenging.

Competency and capacity
to consent
16.25 Over the age of 16, the Mental Capacity
Act 2005 presumes that a patient is able to
make their own decision about their medical
treatment - that is, choosing among the options
made available to them - unless it is shown
that they are unable to do so because they
cannot understand or retain or use/weigh the
information relevant to that decision because of
an impairment or disturbance in the functioning
of their mind or brain. The Family Law Reform
Act 1969 s8 set out that the consent of a person
aged 16 is as effective as the consent of a
patient aged 18.
16.26 Under the age of 16, the ability to make
the decision means having sufficient maturity
and understanding to make the relevant
decision (‘Gillick competence’).
16.27 Although, as described in Chapter 4,
in the Bell v Tavistock judgment, the Court of
Appeal rejected the High Court’s guidance on
whether particular age groups would be likely
to be able to make such decisions, as these
decisions would be uniquely difficult for children
to be able to make for themselves, for all the
reasons set out above.
16.28 The age for starting puberty blockers
varies between clinics. Many guidelines have
removed a lower age limit as puberty is now
starting earlier than it was previously. This
means that children as young as 9 can be
started on treatment. However, such early
treatment has not been the practice in the UK
([2021] EWCA Civ 1363).
16.29 Even at Tanner stages 2-3, young people
have had minimal experience of their own
biological puberty, and such experience as they
have had may have been distressing for a wide
range of reasons.

195

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

16.30 Once on puberty blockers, they will enter
a period when peers are developing physically
and sexually whilst they will not be, and they
may be experiencing the side effects of the
blocker. There are no good studies on the
psychological, psychosexual and developmental
impact of this period of divergence from peers.
16.31 However, if a young person is already
on puberty blockers they will need to make the
decision to consent to masculinising/feminising
hormones at a point when their psychosexual
development has been paused, and possibly
with little experience of their biological puberty.

Best interests of the child/young
person
16.32 For children and young people there may
also need to be an assessment of best interests
when it comes to making a choice among the
treatment options which are made available, if
they cannot make that decision for themselves.
This must take account of the views, culture
and beliefs of the child or young person, the
parents and/or other close carers, as well as
the views of other healthcare professionals
involved in their care, or professionals involved
in their welfare. Account should also be taken
of “which choice, if there is more than one, will
least restrict the child’s or young person’s future
options” (GMC, 2018).
16.33 Best interests decisions are especially
difficult where the proposed treatment is very
significant, not readily reversible and the
outcome of treatment is less predictable.

Conclusion
16.34 In considering endocrine interventions,
the large number of unknowns regarding the
risk/benefits in any one individual and the
lack of robust information to help them make
decisions present a major problem in obtaining
informed consent.
196

16.35 The more fundamental issue though is
determining the circumstances under which
such treatments should be offered to children
and young people in the first place.
16.36 A trusted source of information is needed
on all aspects of medical care, but in particular it
is important to defuse/manage expectations that
have been built up by claims about the efficacy
of puberty blockers.
16.37 Although younger people experience a
sense of urgency to access medical treatments,
some young adults have suggested that taking
time to explore options is preferable.
16.38 The Review has already advised that
because puberty blockers only have clearly
defined benefits in quite narrow circumstances,
and because of the potential risks to
neurocognitive development, psychosexual
development and longer-term bone health,
they should only be offered under a research
protocol. This has been taken forward by NHS
England and the National Institute for Health
and Care Research (NIHR).
16.39 The option to provide masculinising/
feminising hormones from age 16 is available,
but the Review would recommend an extremely
cautious clinical approach. There should be a
clear clinical rationale for providing hormones at
this stage rather than waiting until an individual
reaches 18. This would keep options open
during this important developmental window,
allowing time for management of any cooccurring conditions, building of resilience
and fertility preservation, if required.
16.40 A more fundamental problem that has
become more apparent as the Review has
progressed is that research on psychosocial
interventions and longer-term outcomes of those
who do not access endocrine pathways is as
weak as research on endocrine treatment. This
leaves a major gap in our knowledge about how
best to support and help this growing population
of young people with gender-related distress in
the context of complex presentations.

Clinical approach and clinical management

16.41 The overarching conclusion from the
evidence presented in this Review is that
the puberty blocker trial, which is already in
development, needs to be one part of a much
broader research programme that seeks to
build the evidence on all potential interventions,
and to determine the most effective way of
supporting these children and young people.

Recommendation 6:

Recommendation 7:
Long-standing gender incongruence
should be an essential pre-requisite
for medical treatment but is only
one aspect of deciding whether a
medical pathway is the right option
for an individual.

The evidence base underpinning
medical and non-medical
interventions in this clinical area must
be improved. Following our earlier
recommendation to establish a
puberty blocker trial, which has been
taken forward by NHS England, we
further recommend a full programme
of research be established. This
should look at the characteristics,
interventions and outcomes of every
young person presenting to the NHS
gender services.

Recommendation 8:

• The puberty blocker trial should
be part of a programme of
research which also evaluates
outcomes of psychosocial
interventions and masculinising/
feminising hormones.

Recommendation 9:

• Consent should routinely be
sought for all children and
young people for enrolment in
a research study with follow-up
into adulthood.

NHS England should review the
policy on masculinising/feminising
hormones. The option to provide
masculinising/feminising hormones
from age 16 is available, but the
Review would recommend extreme
caution. There should be a clear
clinical rationale for providing
hormones at this stage rather than
waiting until an individual reaches 18.

Every case considered for medical
treatment should be discussed at
a national Multi Disciplinary Team
(MDT) hosted by the National
Provider Collaborative replacing
the Multi Professional Review
Group (MPRG).

Recommendation 10:
All children should be offered fertility
counselling and preservation prior to
going onto a medical pathway.

197

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Service
model

198

Service model

This part looks at the service model for children and young people’s gender
services, clinical pathways, workforce and training, service improvement and
research. It seeks to address the following aspects on which the Review has
been asked to provide recommendations:
• pathways of care into local services, including clinical management approaches for individuals
with less complex expressions of gender incongruence who do not need specialist gender
identity services
• pathways of care into specialist gender identity services, including referral criteria into a
specialist gender identity service and referral criteria into other appropriate specialist services
• current and future workforce requirements
• ongoing clinical audit, long-term follow-up, data reporting and future research priorities.

199

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

17. Existing service models
17.1 The interim report highlighted a number of
issues in relation to the existing service model:
17.2 It is unusual for there to be direct referral
into specialist services, as was the case for
The Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust Gender Identity Development Service
(GIDS). Early in the Review it became clear that
referring a rapidly increasing number of children
and young people into a single national service
with insufficient links to local services was not
working. The service did not have the ability to
respond to the increasing demand and was not
a safe or viable long-term option.
17.3 This has led to an increasingly long
waiting list, which clinicians, young people and
their parents/carers cite as the single biggest
challenge in providing high quality care to
gender dysphoric children and young people.

each issue in isolation, without considering the
impact of different issues on each other. This
may include the impact of neurodivergence or
significant mental health issues, including past
history of eating disorders, experiences of loss
and/or trauma and bullying.
17.7 Parents described how an absence of
support following referral left them worried and
frustrated, not knowing where to get help.
The University of York qualitative study
(Appendix 3) found that: “Parents express
continuing uncertainties and doubts about
what was best for their child. They worry about
getting it “wrong”. They also worry about the
extent to which services can understand their
child and respond appropriately”.

17.8 In addition, young people and their families
have highlighted that referral into a service
with a single focus on gender raises the issue
17.4 The long wait can further add to distress,
of ‘diagnostic overshadowing’. They described
result in deterioration of co-occurring mental
children having more than one presenting
health problems, and make it difficult for children
issue, but different services (for example, GIDS,
and young people to explore the full range of
CAMHS, general practice), dealing with each
options for addressing their gender-related
issue in isolation, without considering how they
distress.
might impact on each other.
17.5 Young people participating in the focus
17.9 Lack of clarity over clinical responsibility
groups and the qualitative research study
for a child/young person following referral,
described how the lack of communication and
and the fact that there has often been little
support while waiting for specialist services
or no preliminary assessment of risk and
meant they had to do their own research. They
safeguarding, is also a cause for concern.
had often decided what they needed by the time
they were seen by GIDS and had already taken 17.10 Addressing these issues requires a
steps to help manage how they felt, including
system-wide response. The Review’s interim
social transition.
report concluded that a fundamentally different
service model is required, and the Review
17.6 Parental and personal narratives described
subsequently undertook stakeholder testing of
children and young people having more than
different service models that would:
one presenting issue, but services (for example,
GIDS, CAMHS, general practice) dealing with

200

Service model

• increase capacity both at tertiary and
secondary care level
• allow initial assessment at an early point
in the patient pathway
• approach clinical management through a
broader paediatric and mental health lens
• have a multi-disciplinary workforce able to
take a holistic view of children and young
people
• skill-up a wider range of clinicians to work
with gender-questioning children and young
people, thus democratising knowledge and
expanding capacity through the system.
17.11 The Review also considered the
practicalities:
• care needs to be provided as close to home
as possible
• roles need to be attractive for recruitment
and tap into as broad a range of skills as
possible
• recruitment to tertiary centres should not
destabilise local services.
17.12 In July 2022, the Review wrote to NHS
England expanding its advice in the interim
report (Appendix 6). The letter set out the key
components of a regional networked model
of care to ensure this population of children
and young people receive the holistic service
described in Part 4 at appropriate levels within
the NHS.
17.13 The aim of the proposed new regionalised
NHS gender service for children and young
people is to provide a comprehensive patient
and family-centred service and package of care,
supporting children and young people who are
questioning their gender identity or experiencing
gender dysphoria to get on the right pathway
for them as an individual.

NHS England’s interim service establishing Phase 1 providers
17.14 Since receiving the Review’s interim
report, NHS England has taken steps to
increase capacity and manage the closure
of GIDS, establishing two new nationally
networked services to be led by specialist
children’s hospitals. This is the first step in
commissioning a network of regional services
across the country over the coming years.
17.15 These Phase 1 service providers will take
over clinical responsibility for seeing children
and young people on the national waiting list, as
well as providing continuity of care for the GIDS
open caseload at the point of transfer as part of
a managed transition of the service.
17.16 There have been delays due to the
complexity of the programme and the
phenomenal challenge of building the new
service. This has meant designing and
commissioning a new clinical and service model
rather than simply transferring the existing
model across to the Phase 1 providers. There
has also been the need to recruit and train a
clinical workforce to meet the requirements of
the new service.
17.17 The Review had hoped to take learning
from the clinicians seeing the patients in the
interim services, about the characteristics of
the patient cohort and optimum pathways of
care. Instead, it has gained insight and learning
from the considerable challenges faced in
establishing the interim service. These have
included: how best to manage the existing
caseload and the recruitment to and training
of staff for the new services.

201

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Existing caseload
17.18 One of the key challenges in establishing
the interim service has been the transfer of the
open caseload. This has proven difficult in light
of a lack of information on the patient cohort
and the expectations of young people and their
families/carers who have started care under a
different clinical model.
17.19 Although representatives of GIDS have
been involved in these discussions, the transfer
of information to the new providers about the
open caseload has proven challenging as the
characteristics of the population have been
difficult to ascertain. The situation is similar for
those on the waiting list.

Recruitment and training
17.20 The reluctance of clinicians to engage in
the clinical care of gender-questioning children
and young people was recognised earlier in this
report. Clinicians cite this stems from the weak
evidence base, lack of consistent professional
guidance and support, and the long-term
implications of making the wrong judgement
about treatment options. In addition, concerns
were expressed about potential accusations of
conversion practice when following an approach
that would be considered normal clinical
practice when working with other groups of
children and young people.
17.21 Throughout the Review, clinicians working
with this population have expressed concerns
about the interpretation of potential legislation
on conversion practices and its impact on the
practical challenges in providing professional
support to gender-questioning young people.
This has left some clinical staff fearful of accepting
referrals of these children and young people.
17.22 Clinical staff must not feel that
discharging their clinical and professional
responsibility may expose them to the risk of
legal challenge, and strong safeguards must be
202

built into any potential legislation on conversion
practices to guard against this eventuality.
This will be of paramount importance in building
(as opposed to diminishing) the confidence of
clinicians working in this area. Any ambiguity
could serve to further disadvantage these children
and young people rather than support them.
17.23 Clinicians are being asked to work within
a highly emotive and politicised arena. This,
coupled with concerns about the weakness of
the evidence base and a lack of professional
guidance, has impacted on the ability of the
new services to recruit the appropriate multidisciplinary workforce.
17.24 For these reasons, whilst the Review
welcomes the first step NHS England has taken
to begin to establish a regional model of care,
it maintains that a much more distributed model
of care is needed to meet current demand and
provide a more appropriate holistic, localised
and timely approach to care for children and
young people needing support around their
gender identity.
17.25 This means services should not be
located solely in tertiary centres. A much
broader based service model is needed with
a flexible workforce working across a regional
footprint in partnership with designated local
specialist services.

International practice
17.26 The University of York looked at how
services are organised in other health systems.
17.27 Each of these models considers the
gender service in isolation. However, models of
care that deliver a clinical service over multiple
sites have the potential to maintain geographical
access to services whilst improving quality of
care and optimising the use of the workforce.

Service model

Models
FigureService
39: Variations
in service models for specialist gender care

Gender
Clinic

• Mental Health
Professionals
• Endocrinologists
• Allied health professionals

Fully integrated
multi-disciplinary
team

eg. Netherlands

Gender
Clinic
• Mental Health
Professionals

• Endocrinologists
• Paediatricians

Psychologically
focused gender
clinic with
separate but linked
endocrine service

eg. UK, Finland

Gender
Clinic
• Endocrinologists
• Paediatricians

• Mental Health
Professionals

Endocrinology
focused gender
clinic with referral
to external mental
health professionals
if appropriate

eg. USA, Canada
NB: These are just exemplars of models that have been described within different countries, but there is also
Clinics
within each country
may vary
considerable
within-country
variation.

203

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Different service models
in the NHS
17.28 A systematic review of ‘multiple site single
service’ models of care was published by Public
Health England (2019) and described a number
of such models.
17.29 The interim service, with two initial
hubs, is a ‘specialist centre’ model of care that
involves a specialist (‘tertiary’) centre accepting
referrals from feeder hospitals in a defined
geographical area. This is intended as a step
towards a clinical network approach.
17.30 ‘Specialist outreach’ involves clinicians
from a specialist centre travelling out from the

centre to smaller sites to offer some elements of
peer support, clinical advice and/or patient care.
Many specialties in both paediatric and adult
care deliver outreach clinics. GIDS operated
this model, running outreach clinics in various
locations around the UK.
17.31 ‘Clinical network’ describes a network
in which a specialist centre provides specialist
treatment to patients who reside in a defined
area, but whose feeder hospitals complete
some form of initial assessment, diagnostics
and medical management before transferring
the patient. This is the model NHS England
consulted on for its interim services: secondary
care provides initial assessment before referring
a patient to the specialist centres.

Figure 40: Descriptive framework describing different types of Multiple-Site, Single Service
models of care

Multi-site System

Clinical Network +

Clinical Network

Specialist outreach

Specialist Centre
Source: Public Health England (October 2019)

204

• Strong central coordination
• Shared Governance structures

• All clinical sites maintain services
• Some aspects of care provided by network

• Feeder hospitals offer diagnostics, some treatment
• Smaller no. of centres offer advanced treatment

• Clinicians visit satellite units from specialist centre

• Feeder sites assess and refer only
• Common referral pathway

Service model

17.32 ‘Clinical network plus’ describes a
network in which all sites provide the same
treatment to patients, but some aspects of
care are restricted to a smaller number of sites
at certain times. Within these models, some
secondary-level services take an intermediate
role between secondary and tertiary care and
with additional staffing and training provide an
additional level of care that is not routine in all
secondary-level services (for example, different
levels of neonatal care).
17.33 ‘Multi-site system’ describes a model
of care in which all clinical sites provide the
same level of care to patients, based on shared
treatment pathways and clinical policies and
with shared governance across the system.
17.34 The clinical network plus and the multisite system models are most closely aligned
with the Review’s proposed model because:
• they provide better continuity of care, closer
to home, and the ability for children and
young people to move between components
of the service at their own pace
• there is a finite workforce available to
serve the needs of this population and
the wider population of young people with
complex needs. Therefore, partnerships
with local services must be developed so
that workforce can be shared across the
network without destabilising local services.
17.35 Without this approach the challenges in
recruitment experienced by both GIDS and the
Phase 1 providers will continue.

205

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

18. A new model for gender services
for children and young people
Figure
41: Proposed
service
13. Proposed
Service
Modelmodel

FUNCTIONS
• Clinical standards
• Educational standards
• Clinical research
• National data & audit
• Clinical decisions for
medical pathway

E
N ATI
ONAL PROVIDER COLLABORATI V

RC

RC

REGIONAL CENTRE

RC

REGIONAL CENTRE

• Specialist assessment
• Treatment & ongoing
therapeutic support
• Manage the Operational
Delivery Network (ODN) for
the region
• Education & training for the ODN
• Consultation to Designated
Local Specialist Services (DLSS)

REGIONAL CENTRE

OPERATIONAL DELIVERY NETWORKS (ODNs)

DLSS

DLSS

DLSS

DLSS

DLSS

DESIGNATED LOCAL SPECIALIST SERVICES

206

DLSS

DLSS

• Assessment
• Ongoing therapeutic support in
a shared care arrangement
with regional centres

Service model

Regional Centres
18.1 Despite the growth in the numbers of
children and young people requiring support
from the NHS for gender-related issues, the
number remains relatively small and there will
still be a need for specialist tertiary care for
some of the cohort.
18.2 The regional centres will play a pivotal
role in delivering the new services. They will
be responsible for managing the caseload
of individuals requiring support around their
gender identity and hold responsibility for
the assessment and treatment of those with
more complex presentations and requiring
more specialist care. They will oversee and
work through an operational delivery network
(ODN) within their region and will also provide
consultation support and training to local
providers.

Designated Local Specialist
Services
18.5 Although the Review recognises that
much of the assessment described in Part 4
could be undertaken more locally by secondary
care services, it recognised that not all local
services will have the capacity, capability and/
or aspiration to support this cohort, particularly
given that Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS) services are already
stretched, with a high threshold for referrals.

18.6 It is recommended that a smaller number
of secondary services within CAMHS and
paediatrics should be identified initially to act as
Designated Local Specialist Services (DLSS)
within each area. This would increase the
available workforce through a flexible, multi-site
staff group working between the DLSS and the
regional centre, with the opportunity to provide
18.3 The Review has advised that these centres targeted training and upskilling.
be situated within experienced providers of
18.7 This mix of paediatric and mental health
paediatric tertiary care that have the ability to
services is a fundamental change to the existing
provide essential related services to support
service model. In order to meet the wider needs
the broad range of presentations this group of
of this population these services will need to
children and young people may have (or be
demonstrate experience in working in child and
able to access such services through provider
adolescent health and with young people with
collaborations). These essential services should complex needs, in addition to having access to
include, but not be limited to: mental health
mental health support. Among the workforce
services, services for children and young
GPs with a special interest in adolescent health
people with autism and other neurodiverse
could be included.
presentations, and access to endocrinology
services and fertility services, where appropriate 18.8 Initially the Review advises the Regional
Centres work within existing relationships to
for those seeking medical intervention.
allow this provision to be established as quickly
18.4 It will also be essential that the regional
as possible with appropriate funding. Joint
centres have established academic and
contracts between the Regional Centres and the
education functions to ensure that ongoing
DLSS should be used to support flexibility of the
research and training is embedded within the
workforce.
service delivery model.

207

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

18.9 Several children’s hospitals operate
community paediatric and/or mental health
services. For example, Alder Hey Children’s
NHS Foundation Trust provides both acute,
community and mental health paediatric
services for its local population of children
and young people. The range of mental
health services includes Child and Adolescent
Community Mental Health Services, Community
Eating Disorder Service, 24/7 Crisis Care
Service including Home Based Treatment
Service, Mental Health in Schools Service,
Enhanced Support Team and Tier 4 Children’s
Inpatient Regional Unit (Sunflower House).
The services are located with Community
and Neurodevelopmental Paediatric Services
including autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
assessment and diagnostic services, which
ensures an integrated, holistic and supportive
approach to the physical and emotional health
needs of children and young people.
18.10 The Review has met with clinicians
working in services established to support a
wide range of adolescent health and wellbeing
needs; for example, the Well Centre, a GP-led
service in Lambeth, London, and the Onward
Clinic in the Brandon Centre, a communitybased service with secondary care staffing
based in Kentish Town, London.
18.11 These centres provide a wide range of
services, helping young people to overcome the
psychological and social needs and challenges
they might face, and providing support with
mental health and physical and emotional
wellbeing through GPs, mental health and
wellbeing practitioners. There are also youth
workers to support young people along their
care pathway.

208

18.12 There is an opportunity for Regional
Centres to partner with these types of services
to provide the holistic needs assessment and
some of the treatment pathways that might
be identified through formulation and the
individualised care plan. Such services may
also provide parenting and broader family
support.
18.13 The expansion of such models could
support not only this population of young
people, but also the wider population of
children and young people presenting to the
NHS, with gender being one component of the
needs addressed. In the future, consideration
could also be given to the inclusion of longterm physical care; for example, screening
and supporting the public health needs of this
population within a community setting.
18.14 There is considerable scope for local
innovation and voluntary sector partnerships in
developing these services in a range of settings.
Yellow Door - Gender Identity Therapy Service,
for example, is a voluntary sector Southamptonbased service commissioned by the NHS that
aims to provide a safe and supported thinking
space for children and young people who are
negatively affected by confusion, distress or
interpersonal difficulties related to gender.
18.15 NHS provision for young people across
the board requires service and workforce
development and additional sustained
investment. There is an opportunity to integrate
investment and development of gender services
with the ambitions set out in the NHS Long Term
Plan (2019) for broader adolescent provision.
In doing so, consideration should be given
to integration across health, social care and
other sectors, especially for young people with
complex and/or multiple needs.

Service model

Operational Delivery Networks
18.16 Each Regional Centre should have an
ODN. ODNs are network groups comprising
representatives from the regional centre, DLSS
and relevant agencies; for example, social care
and education. The ODN should hold shared
care agreements with DLSS to ensure this
population has access to supportive care and
appropriate treatment as close to home as
possible.

18.18 In relation to this specific population the
ODN Board will:
• support capacity planning and activity
monitoring with collaborative forecasting
of demand and matching of demand and
supply
• ensure the DLSS meet data collection
requirements and standards as established
by the National Provider Collaborative
• establish sub-groups to manage the
administrative functions around data,
referrals and oversight of ongoing local
training and CPD.

18.17 An ODN board should be established with
formal governance responsibility for children
and young people in the region. An ODN is
an established NHS England structure (NHS
18.19 This approach should ensure clinical risk
Commissioning Board, 2012). Its purpose is to:
is held at the local level and help to facilitate
access to and integration of local support
• ensure effective clinical flows through the
services. The shared care arrangements will
provider system with clinical collaboration
require organisations to use the same record
for networked provision of services
system to allow joined-up working.
• take a whole-system, collaborative provision
approach, ensuring the delivery of safe
National Provider Collaborative
and effective services across the patient
18.20 The Regional Centres will need to
pathway
come together to form a National Provider
• improve cross-organisational, multiCollaborative to ensure standards of care
professional clinical engagement to improve
and equitable access is maintained. This
pathways of care
governance role will be key to the success of
• enable the development of consistent
the model and should include the following
provider guidance and improved service
functions:
standards, ensuring a consistent patient
• the development of shared standards,
and family experience
operating procedures and clinical protocols,
• focus on quality and effectiveness
for example, for assessment and treatment
through the facilitation of comparative
• updating the assessment framework in line
benchmarking and auditing of services, with
with emerging evidence, audit and quality
implementation of required improvements
improvement
• fulfil a key role in assuring providers and
• the development of clear referral criteria
commissioners of all aspects of quality as
and intake procedures to ensure equitable
well as co-ordinating provider resources
access to services
to secure the best outcomes for patients
across wide geographical areas.

209

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

• a forum for discussion of complex cases
and all decisions about medical care (a
national multi-disciplinary team), ultimately
subsuming the role of the Multi-Professional
Review Group (MPRG)
• an ethics forum for cases where there is
uncertainty or disagreement about best
interests or appropriate care
• a process of peer review between Regional
Centres

18.23 The proposed new service model with
its formalised network structures at national
and regional levels, and increased number
of providers, should allow care and risk to be
actively managed at different levels according to
need, reducing waiting times for specialist care.
18.24 It is envisaged that this model will
also support integration between different
children’s services and facilitate early access
to local services along flexible pathways that
better respond to children and young people’s
individual needs. Overall, this model should
improve the experience of care for children and
young people questioning their gender identity.

• development of a programme of ongoing
continuing professional development (CPD)
for staff at all levels, as well as educational
standards for practitioners within the various
tiers of service provision
18.25 The new providers of these services
• collation of the national dataset and conduct should quickly develop their ODN and DLSS
networks, utilising existing relationships in the
of national audit
first instance with those services that have the
• development of a quality improvement
capacity, capability and interest in supporting
programme to ensure evolving best practice this cohort to establish this vital level of service
provision more quickly.
• consideration of research requirements
• ongoing research in areas of weak
evidence.
18.21 The National Provider Collaborative
should consist of clinical and academic
representatives from across the Regional
Centres, as well as any external experts
considered to be necessary for its work.
This will require resourcing for a secretariat
and time allocated in job roles to deliver the
responsibilities.

Summary - service model
18.22 The aim is that no matter where in
the country the child/young person is seen,
they will receive the same high standards of
evidence-based care and better information
upon which to base their decisions, avoiding
a so-called ‘postcode lottery’.

210

18.26 This approach would act as a stepping
stone to ultimately skilling up all secondarylevel services to provide assessment and
psychological support for these children
and young people, with medical intervention
remaining at tertiary level.

Recommendation 11:
NHS England and service providers
should work to develop the regional
multisite service networks as soon
as possible. This could be based on
a lead provider model, where NHS
England delegates commissioning
responsibility to the regional
services to subcontract locally to
providers in their region.

Service model

Recommendation 12:
The National Provider Collaborative
should be established without delay.

Workforce

18.30 Most international guidelines recommend
that there should be a multi-professional team
involved in assessment and care. The exact
composition of the recommended team varies,
but access to mental health professionals within
the specialist team and/or within local teams is
a common theme.

18.31 In line with international practice, the
Regional Centres will need to have a broad
18.27 The Review recognises that workforce
multi-professional workforce. The skills of those
shortfalls are one of the most challenging
working within the service need to reflect the
aspects of delivering this service.
needs of this heterogenous group and the
18.28 Within the existing model of care, the
service needs to include the appropriate skill
vast majority of gender-questioning children and
mix to support both individuals who require
young people who seek help from the NHS have
medical intervention and those who do not.
been referred to a highly specialised workforce
working solely in gender care. A smaller number 18.32 This workforce should include
paediatricians, psychiatrists psychologists,
are successfully supported in local CAMHS or
psychotherapists, clinical nurse specialists,
paediatric services. This approach has had the
social workers, family therapists, specialists in
unintended consequence of de-skilling the rest
of the workforce and generating unmanageably autism and other neurodiverse presentations,
speech and language therapists, occupational
long waiting lists.
health specialists and, for the subgroup for
18.29 Given the increasing numbers of gender
whom medical treatment may be considered
diverse and gender-questioning young people,
appropriate, endocrinologists and fertility
it is important that all clinical staff are able to
specialists. Social care should also be
support them in a range of settings across the
embedded and there should be expertise in
NHS. It is equally important that professionals
safeguarding and support for looked-after
who are involved in their ongoing care have
children and children who have experienced
broad-based skills in adolescent physical and
trauma.
mental health so that young people are treated
18.33 The role of paediatric and mental health
holistically and not solely on the basis of their
professionals in this area is well recognised,
gender presentation
but the role of allied health professionals has
been under recognised. Speech and language
therapists are particularly important given that a
large subset of this population are neurodiverse
or have other communication needs. Screening
for these issues and/or advising on accessibility
of written and verbal information for consent
is essential. Some young people may need
specialist voice intervention.

211

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

18.34 This group of young people may equally
need access to occupational therapy support,
again because of issues of neurodiversity
and sensory distress, but also because they
may experience a wide range of barriers to
participation in school or other peer settings
that may require assessment and advice.
18.35 Staff should maintain a broad
clinical perspective by working across related
non-gender services within the tertiary centre
and as a multi-site staff group between tertiary
and secondary centres in order to embed
the care of children and young people with
gender-related distress within a broader child
and adolescent health context. This has the
additional benefits of not destabilising existing
services, supporting continuity and connection
and sharing expertise and knowledge.
18.36 This is a highly challenging, complex
and emotive area in which to work. Those
working with this group have given professional
supervision and support to provide a place
for exploration of their own approach and the
range of emotions they may feel. There should
be formal processes for raising concerns that
sit outside immediate supervision. This should
support consistency in approach and improve
retention of the workforce.
18.37 The National Provider Collaborative
should also explore running structured forums
where all staff, clinical and non-clinical, come
together regularly to discuss the emotional and
social aspects of working within the service supporting staff by giving them a safe place
to raise issues and ask questions.

212

Recommendation 13:
To increase the available workforce
and maintain a broader clinical lens,
joint contracts should be utilised
to support staff to work across
the network and across different
services.

Recommendation 14:
NHS England, through its Workforce
Training and Education function,
must ensure requirements for this
service area are built into overall
workforce planning for adolescent
services.

Training and education
18.38 During the course of the Review, it has
become clear that there is a general lack of
confidence among the wider workforce to
engage with gender-questioning children and
adolescents. Many clinicians working with
children and young people more generally have
transferable skills and expertise, but there is a
need for all clinicians across the NHS to receive
better training about how to work sensitively and
effectively with trans, non-binary and genderquestioning young people.
18.39 Clinicians working with children and
young people and families/carers will need to
have the skills to competently engage families/
carers from a broad range of backgrounds, and
be aware and informed of the range of priorities
that young people and their parents/carers can
present to services.

Service model

18.40 Young people have told the Review that
they want clinicians to listen to them, respect
how they feel and support them to work through
their feelings and options. They expect clinicians
to display compassion, understanding, and to
treat them as an individual.
18.41 Training programmes should follow
practice in other service areas (for example,
safeguarding), where levels of competency and
training needs depend on the staff group and
clinical area.
18.42 In addition, providers should work with
commissioners to realise the NHS Long Term
Workforce Plan commitment that: “Additional
specialist training in gender dysphoria will be
provided to meet the workforce shortage in
this specialist service; we will raise awareness
of this patient group across the workforce and
support healthcare professionals to signpost
and support patients” (NHS England, 2023).
18.43 An effective approach would be to
establish a consortium to include relevant
Medical Royal Colleges, special interest groups
and other professional bodies, including but not
limited to:
• Association of Clinical Psychologists
• Association of Psychotherapists
• Royal College of Speech and Language
Therapists
• Royal College of Occupational Therapists
• British Association of Social Workers.
18.44 The consortium should develop a shared
skills and competency framework relevant to all
clinical and social care staff working in this area
at different levels within the system. This should
include broader skills in adolescent care, as well
as the more specific aspects relevant to gender
care.

18.45 Individual professional organisations
should determine which of the transferable skills
and competencies are already embedded in the
training curricula of their specific staff groups
and where the gaps are.
18.46 The consortium should then develop a
curriculum to cover topics that are deemed to
be missing from existing training programmes
and curricula, and necessary for top-up training/
CPD/credentialing for individuals working within
this area.
18.47 Training materials developed by MindEd
and the induction materials developed for the
Phase 1 providers will be helpful starting points
for this work (MindEd, 2023).
18.48 The National Provider Collaborative will
have responsibility to engage with the education
consortium and ensure that new evidence and
practice is integrated into teaching materials.
18.49 In addition to the development of
national training resources, the National
Provider Collaborative and individual Regional
Centres/ODNs will have responsibility for
ensuring a CPD programme comprising case
presentations, research updates and other
methods of shared learning as in all other
specialty areas.
18.50 Service users and families have told the
Review that there is not a single trusted source
of information available from the NHS. The
Provider Collaborative should work to develop
regularly updated information for service users,
families and other agencies such as schools
and social care services.

213

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Recommendation 15:
NHS England should commission
a lead organisation to establish a
consortium of relevant professional
bodies to:
• develop a competency
framework
• identify gaps in professional
training programmes
• develop a suite of training
materials to supplement
professional competencies,
appropriate to their clinical
field and level. This should
include a module on the holistic
assessment framework and
approach to formulation and
care planning.

Recommendation 16:
The National Provider Collaborative
should coordinate development of
evidence-based information and
resources for young people, parents
and carers. Consideration should
be given as to whether this should
be a centrally hosted NHS online
resource.

Service improvement
18.51 As set out in the interim report, central to
any service improvement is the systematic and
consistent collection of data on the outcomes of
treatment.
18.52 Throughout the course of the Review, it
has been evident that there has been a failure
to reliably collect even the most basic data and
information in a consistent and comprehensive
manner; data have often not been shared,
or have been unavailable. This has led to
challenges in understanding the patient cohort,
referral data and outcomes, all of which
have hindered the work of the Review. More
importantly, this has been to the detriment of
young people and their families being able to
make informed decisions.
18.53 There needs to be a cultural shift, with
active leadership supporting all providers to
adopt a proactive learning culture across the
new services.
18.54 There should be a process of continuous
service improvement and clinical reflection, with
consideration to how services should evolve as
the evidence base grows and care pathways are
evaluated.
18.55 The Review has previously advised that
the National Provider Collaborative should
oversee this process, ensuring national
treatment protocols and guidelines are in place
to enable standardisation and consistency
in practice, including for case management,
assessment, consent and safeguarding.
18.56 Regional Centres should ensure these
standards are disseminated and implemented
through their networks and that the relevant
workforce is recruited and trained, contingent
on the type of support, therapy or treatment this
population needs.

214

Service model

18.57 The National Provider Collaborative
should have independent oversight of quality
improvement (for example, through a Healthcare
Quality Improvement Partnership commissioned
approach) to ensure the highest possible
standards of data management and utilisation.
Regional Centres should also have oversight
and reporting structures to monitor quality and
improvement across their networks.
18.58 There remains the need for the collection
of an agreed core dataset to inform service
improvement and research, based on similar
approaches already established in other
specialties; for example, PICANet - Paediatric
Intensive Care Audit Network for the UK and
Ireland in paediatric critical care. This will be
critical to informing current and future clinical
practice and care for this population.

Recommendation 17:
A core national dataset should
be defined for both specialist and
designated local specialist services.

Recommendation 18:
The national infrastructure should
be put in place to manage data
collection and audit and this should
be used to drive continuous quality
improvement and research in an
active learning environment.

Research capacity
18.59 The gaps in the evidence base regarding
all aspects of gender care for children and
young people have been highlighted, from
epidemiology through to assessment, diagnosis,
therapeutic support and treatment.
18.60 It is troubling that so little is known about
this cohort and their outcomes. An ongoing
programme of work is required if the new casemix of children and young people and their
needs are to be fully understood, as well as the
short-, medium- and longer-term impacts of all
clinical interventions.
18.61 Given the particular uncertainties
regarding the long-term outcomes of medical
and non-medical interventions, and the broader
knowledge gaps in this area, the Review has
previously advised on the need to build research
capacity into the national network.
18.62 This research capacity is needed to:
• provide ongoing appraisal of new literature
and rapid translation into clinical practice
• continue to identify areas of practice where
further research is needed
• develop a research portfolio that will inform
policy on assessment, support and clinical
care of children with gender dysphoria, from
presentation through to appropriate social,
psychological and medical management.

215

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

18.63 The appropriate research questions and
protocols will need to be developed with input
from a panel of academics, clinicians, service
users and ethicists.
18.64 In order to build on the work undertaken
by the University of York and maintain an upto-date understanding of this complex and
fast-moving research area, a living systematic
review approach should be considered. Through
this approach the systematic reviews could be
continually updated, incorporating relevant new
evidence as it becomes available to inform the
clinical approach of the new services, ensuring it
remains up-to-date and dynamic.
18.65 As detailed in this report, priorities
for research should include analysis of the
characteristics of the population and formal
research protocols underpinning both medical
and non-medical interventions with follow-up
into adulthood.
18.66 Without an established research strategy
and infrastructure, the outstanding questions will
remain unanswered, and the evidence gaps will
continue to be filled with opinion and conjecture.
18.67 This is critical if the NHS is to provide
reliable, transparent information and advice to
support children, young people, their parents
and carers in making potentially life-changing
decisions.

216

Recommendation 19:
NHS England and the National
Institute for Health and Care
Research should ensure that
the academic and administrative
infrastructure to support a
programme of clinically-based
research is embedded into the
regional centres.

Recommendation 20:
A unified research strategy should
be established across the Regional
Centres, co-ordinated through the
National Provider Collaborative and
the Research Oversight Group, so
that all data collected are utilised
to best effect and for sufficient
numbers of individuals to be
meaningful.

Recommendation 21:
To ensure that services are
operating to the highest standards
of evidence the National Institute for
Health and Care Research should
commission a living systematic
review to inform the evolving clinical
approach.

Service model

19. Pathways
19.1 The interim report set out that: “Clear
criteria will be needed for referral to services
along the pathway from primary to tertiary care
so that gender-questioning children and young
people who seek help from the NHS have
equitable access to services”.

International practice
19.2 University of York’s review of international
guidelines (Hewitt et al.: Guidelines 2:
Synthesis) and international survey (Fraser et
al.: Clinic survey) found that:

• Co-occurring mental health conditions or
neurodiversity are usually managed by
other providers, and sometimes have a
longer assessment process.
• The approach among those countries that
reported on their approach to non-binary
individuals is generally cautious, usually
delaying treatment until adulthood.
• Only one guideline mentioned transition to
adult services.

Current referral pathway

• There is variability in whether services
required that referrals come from child and
adolescent mental health services or not.
Several clinics specify that a referral must
come from a clinician. Finland is unique
in also having referral criteria related to
co-occurring conditions, which need to
be addressed prior to a referral being
accepted.

19.3 Usual practice in the NHS is that for
patients to access tertiary (specialist) care,
they need to be seen by a secondary care
practitioner (for example,. CAMHS, paediatrics)
in the first instance. If, following an initial
assessment, that practitioner felt that their case
was sufficiently complex or the individual met
the criteria for tertiary (specialist) care, they
would make a referral.

• The care pathway for most guidelines is
similar, starting with psychosocial care
for pre-pubertal children, followed by
puberty blockers then hormones for eligible
adolescents.

19.4 When the Review commenced, access
to the specialist GIDS service was unusual in
that the service accepted referrals directly from
primary care (a GP) and from non-healthcare
professionals including teachers and youth
workers.

• There is usually a separate pathway for
pre-pubertal children, involving a one-off
assessment followed by local management
until eligible for puberty blockers.
• Denmark and Finland reported a different
pathway for young people with psychosocial
concerns or a short history of distress.

19.5 The audit of GIDS discharge notes,
undertaken by Arden & Gem CSU in spring
2023 (Appendix 6), found that 48.6% of patients
referred to GIDS were referred by CAMHS/
child and young people mental health services
and 40.68% were referred by their GP. Of
the remaining, referrals were made by other
healthcare providers (2.6%), local authorities
(3.3%), the voluntary sector (3.1%) and schools
(1.8%).

217

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

19.6 This created a number of problems:
• The information recorded on the referral
was highly variable and often lacked even
the basic information that the specialist
team would need to screen and triage the
patient.
• Patients who would not usually meet the
threshold for a specialist service were being
referred, meaning waiting times increased
for everyone without a way to discern those
who genuinely required specialist input from
those who could be managed in secondary
care or even primary or community care.
• Once referred, it was unclear who held
clinical responsibility for the care of the
young person.
• Usual assessments that would be
undertaken by a secondary care
practitioner (for example, safeguarding
assessment, mental health assessment)
were not being completed for these young
people, particularly those referred through
a non-healthcare route. This means that
there is an unknown level of risk inherent
in the legacy waiting list, that is, it is not
known which young people may be at risk
of self-harm or suicide, and which may be
at risk due to family breakdown or other
safeguarding issues.

218

19.7 Following the Review’s interim report, NHS
England consulted on a proposal for all referrals
to the Regional Centres to come via secondary
care. We support this approach for the following
reasons:
• The Regional Centres need to remain
focused on the young people they can
best support, and in common with other
tertiary services, an initial local assessment
ensures that referrals that reach the tertiary
centre are appropriate, and are those
whose needs cannot be met locally.
• Any immediate safeguarding or mental
health risk issues can be identified and
addressed, with ongoing local responsibility
for this aspect of care.

Service model

219

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Recommended referral pathway
19.8 Taking the new service model, described
previously, the process for referral would be as
follows:
Referral Pathway
Figure 42: Referral pathway

Immediate
mental health
support

CAHMS
GP
Patient
and family

Primary
Care
Referral to
appropriate service.
Provide web links
to trusted NHS
information
sources.

Paediatrics
Secondary Care
Assessment of immediate
risks to the young person,
either safeguarding or
mental health.
Complete a referral proforma
for Regional Centre. This can
be used to start the holistic
needs assessment.

ODN
Team
Regular referal
meetings.
Teams decide on the
appropriate pathway for
each individual,
ensuring rapid access to
the appropriate team
Options include:
Senior clinician makes
early contact with
referrers or families for
information needed
Referral back to

Secondary Care

with issues to be
addressed locally before
acceptance to specialist
service
Accepted to service

220

Service model

Specialist
Gender Service
Tertiary Care
Allocated a specific pathway
within the service
Allocated a specific clinical
team, including relevant skills
for that person’s identified
needs (e.g. ASD expertise,
occupational therapy to
address issues of participation
etc.).
Holistic needs assessment and
individualised care plan to
meet their identified needs.

pathways may
+ Other
emerge over time

Adolescent pathway

Discharge

Pre-pubertal pathway
To other NHS services as
appropriate to ensure the best
care that meets individual needs.
Back to primary care
Transfer to adult services for
those for whom it is
determined best to continue
on a gender pathway towards
transition.

221

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Role of Primary Care
19.9 Initial consultation should be with the GP,
who should make an initial assessment as they
would with any other adolescent. They will have
a record of any relevant past medical history
and of family context.
19.10 If they consider that the young person
may need to be referred to a Regional hub, they
should make a referral in the first instance to a
secondary Centre service. If the young person
reaches the referral threshold for CAMHS, they
should be referred to that service, or otherwise
they should referred to paediatrics. This should
have an immediate effect on reducing the length
of time children and young people are waiting to
be seen by NHS services.
19.11 The GP should also share weblinks to
trusted NHS information sources with the child
or young person. In the longer term these
sources should be overseen by the National
Provider Collaborative. In the interim, MindEd
(2023) provides initial information for frontline
staff, parents and teachers.

Role of Secondary Care
19.12 The responsibility of secondary care
services is to make an assessment of
immediate risks to the young person - either
safeguarding or mental health. If there are
significant concerns, these will need a local
management plan.
19.13 The secondary care service will also
need to complete a referral pro forma for the
Regional Centre. This will document basic
information including a brief history of the young
person’s gender presentation, family history,
any co-existing conditions, and a list of any
other services or agencies involved in the young
person’s care.
19.14 This information should be used to
inform/start to complete the information for the

222

assessment framework described in Part 4,
so that individuals are not repeating information
unless necessary.

Role of the Operational Delivery
Networks
19.15 The ODN should hold a regular referral
management meeting. Members should include
clinical staff from the tertiary service, as well
as the DLSS. The team should also include
a referral data manager, and may include
representatives from social care, education
and any other relevant team members at the
discretion of the ODN.
19.16 It is essential that information about
referrals be collected on a core database in order
to improve understanding about the characteristics
of the referred population, which is currently weak
both nationally and internationally.
19.17 The referral management group will
make a decision about the appropriate pathway
of care for that young person, ensuring the
fastest access to the appropriate team.
This decision should be communicated to
the young person/child’s parents The ODN
should operate a ‘transparent walls’ approach
between the tertiary centre and DLSS, so that
initial assessment takes place with the most
appropriate team. This will allow flexibility of
capacity and skill mix between the DLSS and
the tertiary team.
19.18 Options may be as follows:
• a senior clinician may make early contact
with referrers or families to gain any further
information needed to make decisions
about the appropriate referral pathway
• referral to secondary care with advice about
issues that may need to be addressed
locally before the young person can be
seen in the specialist service
• accepted to the specialist service.

Service model

19.19 This change should ensure that children
and young people are appropriately engaged
within the health system and that the NHS has
clear responsibility for their care, including
support whilst on the waiting list. It will need
to be underpinned by access to support and
information for referrers, so the whole heath
system better understands the needs of this
population.

Pathways within the service
19.20 Discussions with clinicians have
highlighted the importance of differentiating
the subgroups within the referred population
who may be at risk and/or need more urgent
support, assessment or intervention; there
may also be subgroups for whom early advice
to parents or school staff may be a more
appropriate first step.
19.21 If accepted to the specialist service the
child/young person should:
• be allocated to the specific pathway within
the service (for example, pre-pubertal
pathway or adolescent pathway, other
specific pathways may emerge over time)
• be allocated to a specific clinical team
either within the DLSS or the tertiary
team, to include relevant skills for that
person’s identified needs (for example, ASD
expertise, occupational therapy to address
issues of participation etc.).
• receive a full assessment and holistic plan
to meet their identified needs.
19.22 Children and young people should be
able to move flexibly between different elements
of the service in a step-up or step-down model,
allowing them and their parents/carers to make
decisions at their own pace without requiring
rereferral into the system. This could reduce
the sense of urgency a young person may feel
when first accessing the service. The current
evidence base suggests that children who

present with gender incongruence at a young
age are most likely to desist before puberty,
although for a small number the incongruence
will persist. Parents and families need support
and advice about how best to support their
children in a balanced and non-judgemental
way. In reviewing cases put forward for puberty
blockers, the MPRG noted that children who
had socially transitioned early and completely
were likely to approach puberty in a fearful
and anxious state because of living ‘in stealth’.
Helping parents and families to ensure that
options remain open and flexible for the child,
whilst ensuring that the child is able to function
well in school and socially is an important
aspect of care provision and there should be
no lower age limit for accessing such help and
support. Importantly some children within this
group who remain gender incongruent into
puberty may benefit from puberty blockers and
will be able to enter the specialist component of
the service and access the puberty blocker trial
in a timely way, if already under the supervision
of the regional network.

Recommendation 22:
Within each regional network,
a separate pathway should be
established for pre-pubertal children
and their families. Providers
should ensure that pre-pubertal
children and their parents/carers
are prioritised for early discussion
with a professional with relevant
experience.

223

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Discharge
19.23 Children and young people accessing
gender services may be discharged as follows:
• to other NHS services according to their
individualised care plan

• approaches taken by other NHS services:
for example, adult congenital heart disease,
which is an already established service;
0-25 oncology services, available in some
parts of the country; and the aspiration
within the NHS Long Term Plan (2019).

19.27 Currently, significant numbers of young
people are being transferred from GIDS to adult
• a transfer to adult gender services.
services. Some will have been under the care
Transfer to adult gender services of GIDS, but another group who have turned
17 will not have been seen by GIDS, but whose
19.24 Currently, young people may transition to wait for GIDS is being counted towards the wait
adult gender services from the age of 17. These for adult services. This is increasing waiting
adult services are perceived to be quite different lists for adult services and disadvantaging older
from GIDS, and young people presenting later
adults seeking NHS support.
may therefore not have access to the same
19.28 Taking account of all the above issues,
holistic care as described in this report.
a follow-through service continuing up to age
19.25 There is also concern about the impact
25 would remove the need for transition at this
on the young person of changing clinicians at a
vulnerable time and benefit both this younger
crucial point in their care, particularly for those
population and the adult population. This will
with neurodiversity/special educational needs or have the added benefit in the longer-term of
other vulnerabilities.
also increasing the capacity of adult provision
across the country as more gender services are
19.26 The Review considered the wider
established.
implications surrounding transition from children
and young people’s gender services to an adult 19.29 This would be consistent with other
Gender Dysphoria Clinic (GDC), which include:
service areas supporting young people that are
selectively moving to a ‘0-25 years’ service to
• the clinical risk at the point of transfer,
improve continuity of care.
which includes increased suicidality, loss
to follow-up, extended periods on puberty
“Failure to achieve a safe transition can lead
blockers
to disengagement, failure to take responsibility
for their condition and ultimately poorer health
• that young people are ageing out whilst on
the waiting list having not been seen by the outcomes. By 2028 we aim to move towards
children and young people’s gender service service models for young people that offer
person-centred and age-appropriate care for
• the waiting list challenges within the adult
mental and physical health needs, rather than
services more generally
an arbitrary transition to adult services based on
• the need for the long-term audit and follow- age not need” (NHS Long Term Plan, 2019).
up research data that are currently lost at
the point of transition to adult services
• back to primary care

224

Service model

Recommendation 23:
NHS England should ensure that
each Regional Centre has a followthrough service for 17-25-year-olds;
either by extending the range of the
regional children and young people’s
service or through linked services,
to ensure continuity of care and
support at a potentially vulnerable
stage in their journey. This will also
allow clinical, and research follow up
data to be collected.

19.30 The Review requested data on the
demographics of referrals into adult gender
clinics, and NHS England requested these
data from the clinics on the Review’s behalf.
The dataset was incomplete (particularly for
birth-registered gender) but demonstrates that
the majority of referrals (around 70%) were
birth-registered females under the age of 25.
However, the data related to new referrals
only and did not include direct referrals of
GIDS patients who had reached the age of 17.
Therefore, a conservative estimate would be
that 17-25 year olds account for around 75%
of referrals to adult gender clinics.

Table 11: Referrals received and referrals accepted by Adult Gender Dysphoria Clinics
in England April 2023 - July 2023
R E FE R R A L S R ECE I V E D
(AG E O F I N D I V I D UA L S)

Total Aged under 25 years
Total Aged 25-49 years
Total Aged 50 Years and over
Total
R E FE R R A L S ACCE P T E D
(AG E O F I N D I V I D UA L S)

Total Aged under 25 years
Total Aged 25-49 years
Total Aged 50 Years and over
Total

A PR I L 2 02 0 3

M AY 2 02 3

J U N E 2 02 3

J U LY 2 02 3

268
133
21
422

621
150
21
792

503
231
28
762

521
218
38
777

A PR I L 2 02 0 3

M AY 2 02 3

J U N E 2 02 3

J U LY 2 02 3

245
125
23
393

603
145
20
768

447
218
24
689

496
213
37
746

Source: The Gender Identity Development Service Audit Report, Arden & GEM
NB: All data used has been provided to NHS Arden & GEM CSU by Adult Gender Dysphoria Clinics (GDCs). April 2023
was the first month the GDCs reported activity data using a new template/process. As such data collected/reported in
April and May was experimental and data quality has improved since this period.

225

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Figure 43: Referrals received and referrals accepted by Adult Gender Dysphoria
Clinics in England, April 2023 - July 2023

Source: The Gender Identity Development Service Audit Report, Arden & GEM
NB: All data has been provided to NHS AGEM CSU by GDCs. April 2023 was the first month the GDCs reported activity
data using a new template/process. As such data collected/reported in April and May was experimental and data quality
has improved since this period. No data was provided by Northampton, Newcastle, Nottingham or Exeter GDCs for
referrals received/accepted (sex assigned at birth). AGEM CSU: Arden & GEM Commissioning Support Unit; GDC: Adult
Gender Dysphoria Clinic.

19.31 While provision within the NHS adult
gender services is outside the scope of this
Review, a number of current and past GDC
staff have contacted the Review in confidence
with concerns about their experiences working
in adult gender services. Their experiences
covered clinics across different parts of the
country, and the Review will set out the main
points of concern to NHS England. The
consistent messages are represented below.
• Clinicians confirmed the changing
demographic as demonstrated by the data
above. They described how this changed
over a 2-year period between 2017 and
2019, from a mixed age range group with a
majority of birth-registered males to 70-80%
birth-registered females under the age of 25.

226

• In terms of complexity, clinicians described
a large percentage of the patients having
various combinations of confusion about
sexuality, psychosis, neurodevelopmental
disorders, trauma and deprivation, forensic
issues and a range of other undiagnosed
conditions.
• There was an expectation that patients
would be started on masculinising/
feminising hormones by their second
appointment, which was a cause of concern
given the complexity of presentations.
• Clinicians reported seeing an increasing
number of detransitioners, describing how
they often moved between clinics as they
preferred not to return to the clinic that had
originally treated them.

Service model

19.32 As the services for children and young
people develop, a strategic approach will be
needed to ensure that adult service provision
takes account of different population needs
and emerging evidence.

Recommendation 24:
Given that the changing
demographic presenting to
children and young people’s
services is reflected in a change
of presentations to adult services,
NHS England should consider
bringing forward any planned update
of the adult service specification
and review the model of care and
operating procedures.

19.36 The Review has heard that people
experiencing regret may be hesitant to engage
with the gender services that supported them
through their transition. Consideration should be
given to whether existing service specifications
need to be adapted to specifically provide for
detransition pathways, or whether this should be
a separately commissioned service. This should
be in consultation with people who have been
through detransition.

Recommendation 25:
NHS England should ensure there
is provision for people considering
detransition, recognising that they
may not wish to re-engage with the
services they were previously under.

Detransition

Private provision

19.33 The issues around de/retransition have
been highlighted in Part 4 in relation to the
outcomes of medical interventions and longterm follow-up. There is a need for better
services and pathways for this group, many of
whom are living with the irreversible effects of
transition and no clear way to acc ess services.

19.37 The Review has heard that a number
of young people have sought private provision
whilst on the waiting list for GIDS, and about
families trying to balance the risks of obtaining
unregulated and potentially dangerous hormone
supplies over the internet with the ongoing
trauma of prolonged waits for assessment.
Feedback from the lived experience focus
groups presents this as “a forced choice
(because the NHS provision is not accessible
in a timely way) rather than a preference”.
The ongoing cost of this treatment and the
subsequent monitoring can be prohibitive for
some.

19.34 NHS gender services should support
all those presenting with gender incongruence
and dysphoria, whether that be to transition,
detransition or retransition. Those who choose
to detransition should be carefully monitored in
a supportive setting, particularly when coming
off hormone treatments.
19.35 It is also important that services
understand and learn from those who choose
to detransition as their experience can be used
to inform understanding of what services are
required earlier in the pathway. There is also
the need for more research to understand what
factors contribute to the decision to detransition.

19.38 Additionally, GPs have expressed
concern about being pressurised to prescribe
puberty blockers or masculinising/feminising
hormones after these have been initiated by
private providers and that there is a lack of
clarity around their responsibilities in relation to
monitoring.
227

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

19.39 The Review understands and shares
the concerns about the use of unregulated
medications and of providers that are not
regulated within the UK. Any clinician who
ascertains that a young person is being given
drugs from an unregulated source should make
the young person and their family aware of the
risks of such treatment.

their baseline levels for monitoring purposes;
for example, in relation to bone density, as well
as other initial assessments. If an individual
were to have taken puberty blockers outside
the study, their eligibility may be affected.

19.40 In terms of shared care and prescribing
responsibility, this should mirror other areas
of practice. Specifically, no clinician should
prescribe outside their competence, nor should
GPs be expected to enter into a shared care
arrangement with a private provider, particularly
if that private provider is acting outside NHS
guidance. Additionally, pharmacists are
responsible for ensuring medications prescribed
to patients are suitable (General Pharmaceutical
Council, n.d.).

The Department of Health and
Social Care and NHS England
should consider the implications
of private healthcare on any future
requests to the NHS for treatment,
monitoring and/or involvement in
research. This needs to be clearly
communicated to patients and
private providers.

19.41 However, there should be an
arrangement to carry out relevant investigations
ensure a young person is not coming to harm
(for example, monitoring bone density).
19.42 In terms of funding, NHS England will
normally only fund the treatment of a patient
who has transferred from privately funded
healthcare where their NHS clinician is content
that the treatment is clinically indicated. This
decision would usually require an individual to
join the appropriate waiting list to be assessed
by the NHS clinician within NHS protocols
before the decision could be made. The
prescription could then be continued if the
clinician were satisfied that the treatment is
clinically indicated and safe.
19.43 In the case of puberty blockers, NHS
England has set out that these will only be
available under a research protocol (NHS
England, 2024). On entering the trial, the young
person will have a number of tests to establish

228

Recommendation 26:

Recommendation 27:
The Department of Health and
Social Care should work with
the General Pharmaceutical
Council to define the dispensing
responsibilities of pharmacists of
private prescriptions and consider
other statutory solutions that would
prevent inappropriate overseas
prescribing.

Changing NHS number and
access to healthcare
19.44 Currently, when a person requests to
change their gender on their NHS record, NHS
guidance requires that they are issued with a
new NHS number.

Service model

19.45 Clinicians have raised concerns about
children and young people’s NHS numbers
being changed inconsistently, as there is no
specific guidance for GPs and others as to
when this should be done for this population
and under what consent.

19.48 The concerns with changing NHS
number have also shone a light on the varied
experiences and needs of transgender people
who are often disadvantaged as they access
healthcare (for example, screening services)
and risk misdiagnosis.

19.46 This has implications for safeguarding
and clinical management of these children and
young people, and could affect longer-term
health management into adulthood (for example,
in terms of screening).

19.49 It is unclear why an NHS number should
need to be changed when the patient is under 18.

19.47 Safeguarding professionals have
described a range of situations where this has
put children/young people at risk. These include
young people attending hospital after selfharm not being identifiable as a child already
on a child protection order; records of previous
trauma and/or physical ill health being lost;
people who do not have parental responsibility
changing a child’s name and gender; children
being re-registered as the opposite gender in
infancy; children on the child protection register
being untraceable after moving to a new area.

19.50 From a research perspective, the issuing
of new NHS numbers makes it more difficult
to identify the long-term outcomes for a patient
population for whom the evidence base is weak.

Recommendation 28:
The NHS and the Department
of Health and Social Care
needs to review the process and
circumstances of changing NHS
numbers and find solutions to
address the clinical and research
implications.

229

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

20. Implementation
20.1 The Review recognises that delivery
of the aspirations set out in this report will
require significant changes. The move to the
proposed service model will require a phased
approach and it may be several years before
the full model is operational across the country.
Pragmatic strategic and operational plans are
required that set out in a transparent way the
steps that will be taken to realise the service
transformation. This will be essential to build
trust and manage expectations.
20.2 Governance needs to be put in place
to oversee implementation of the required
changes and provide system-wide leadership.
This should be external to the Specialised
Commissioning division and draw clinical
leadership from professional bodies. Given
the level of external interest in these services
progress against the implementation plans
should be reported.

Recommendation 29:
NHS England should develop an
implementation plan with clear
milestones towards the future
clinical and service model. This
should have board level oversight
and be developed collaboratively
with those responsible for the
health of children and young people
more generally to support greater
integration to meet the wide-ranging
needs of complex adolescents.

230

Recommendation 30:
NHS England should establish
robust and comprehensive contract
management and audit processes
and requirements around the
collection of data for the provision
of these services. These should
be adhered to by the providers
responsible for delivering these
services for children and young
people.
20.3 While the Review has been focused
on children and young people with gender
incongruence and gender-related distress, the
NHS needs to be ambitious in its provision for all
children and young people seeking NHS support.
20.4 Consideration should be given to the need
to integrate services across health, social care
and other sectors, especially for young people
with complex and/or multiple needs.
20.5 Through the work of the Review it is clear
that the type of holistic service and structures
described for gender services could work well
for how the NHS supports children and young
people more generally.
20.6 NHS provision for adolescents across the
board requires greater service and workforce
development and sustained investment. Without
this we are letting down future generations. NHS
England should use this opportunity to integrate
investment and development of gender services
with the ambitions set out in the NHS Long
Term Plan for broader adolescent provision,
with consideration given to a complex
adolescent pathway.

Service model

Wider system learning
20.7 Clinical staff need support and guidance
from their professional bodies to apply the
evidence-based approaches described in
this report. The consortium brought together
to develop training resources should also
be a vehicle for agreeing professional
guidance for their respective clinical groups.
This collaborative approach should include
processes for listening to the community the
service is built for.
20.8 Innovation is important if medicine is to
move forward, but there must be a proportionate
level of monitoring, oversight and regulation
that does not stifle progress, but prevents creep
of unproven approaches into clinical practice.
Innovation must draw from and contribute to the
evidence base.
20.9 Although the GIDS service had set up a
research study to evaluate the use of puberty
blockers, it failed to publish the results for four
years, and continued to act outside of its own
findings, and the limitations of the service
specification.

Recommendation 31:
Professional bodies must come
together to provide leadership and
guidance on the clinical management
of this population taking account of
the findings of this report.

20.11 At a national level, systems are in place to
ensure that any new drug is subjected to rigorous
trials, appraisal and approval before unrestricted
use on patients. Medical devices are also subject
to scrutiny and approval. In response to the lack
of such a system being in place for interventional
procedures, in 1996 the Safety and Efficacy
Register for New Interventional Procedures
(SERNIP) was founded by the Royal colleges, and
allowed voluntary registration for new procedures.
Subsequently the National Institute for Clinical
Excellence has taken responsibility for safety and
efficacy of interventional procedures (Campbell &
Maddern, 2003).
20.12 In the case of use of puberty blockers,
there was another system weakness in that
an off-label use went beyond the usual level
of permissiveness in extending use to a very
different indication. NICE may be well placed to
lead work to address how this kind of innovation
should be managed.

Recommendation 32:
Wider guidance applicable to
all NHS services should be
developed to support providers
and commissioners to ensure
that innovation is encouraged but
that there is appropriate scrutiny
and clinical governance to avoid
incremental creep of practice in the
absence of evidence.

20.10 At a local level regulation of innovation
should be integrated with regulation of
clinical care. Responsible innovation requires
anticipatory governance processes to be
put in place, organisational safeguards and
submission of innovation to external review.
Reporting must include failure as well as
success (Centre for Medical Ethics and Law
HKU, 2024 [video]).
231

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Final thoughts from the Chair
20.13 It has been a privilege to undertake this
important and very necessary Review, but it
has, at times, been heartbreaking to hear the
struggles that young people and their families
face trying to navigate their way to care. Over
a number of years, the children and young
people at the heart of this review have been
bypassed by local services and directed to a
single national service that, whilst passionate
and wholly committed to their care, had
developed a fundamentally different philosophy
and approach compared to other paediatric and
mental health services.
20.14 While it will take a while to build the whole
network of services, I very much hope that with
this new approach, that brings these young
people back into mainstream care, clinical staff
will see this is an important and rewarding
area of work. Most importantly I hope that the
children and young people will benefit from
access to a holistic multi-faceted model of care,
along with a research infrastructure that will
provide them with more robust evidence-based
information on which to make decisions that
may have long-term implications.
20.15 Finally, I am aware that this report will
generate much discussion and that strongly
held views will be expressed. While open and
constructive debate is needed, I would urge
everybody to remember the children and young
people trying to live their lives and the families/
carers and clinicians doing their best to support
them. All should be treated with compassion
and respect.

232

Service model

233

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Glossary

234

Glossary

The glossary below sets out a description of some of the terms we have used in the Review.
At times, the Report covers complex scientific concepts and research; the glossary aims to support
reader understanding and accessibility.
There is also sometimes no consensus on the best language to use relating to the topic of gender
identity. Language changes rapidly and new generations develop varied ways of describing their
experiences using different terms and constructs that are relevant to them. The Review tries as far
as possible to use language and terms that are respectful and acknowledge diversity, but that also
accurately illustrate the complexity of what we are trying to describe and articulate.
The terms we have used may not always feel right to some; nevertheless, it is important to emphasise
that the language used is not an indication of a position being taken by the Review.
TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Affirmative model

A model of gender healthcare that originated in the
USA, which affirms a young person’s subjective gender
experience while remaining open to fluidity and changes
over time (Chen et al., 2021; Ehrensaft et al., 2018;
Hidalgo et al., 2013; Olson-Kennedy et al., 2019). This
approach is used in some key child and adolescent
clinics across the Western world.

Assent

To agree to or approve of something (idea, plan or
request), especially after thoughtful consideration.

Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity
Disorder

ADHD

A neurodevelopmental condition that affects people's
behaviour - people with ADHD can seem restless, may
have trouble concentrating and may act on impulse.
They may also have sleep and anxiety disorders. ADHD
is an example of neurodiversity (see below).

Autistic Spectrum
Disorder

ASD

The medical name for autism. ASD is a neurological and
developmental disorder that affects how people interact
with others, communicate, learn and behave.
DSM-5 (see below) sets out people with ASD often have:
• Difficulty with communication and interaction with
other people.
• Restricted interests and repetitive behaviours.
• Symptoms that affect their ability to function in
school, work, and other areas of life.
ASD is known as a “spectrum” disorder because there is
wide variation in the type and severity of symptoms people
experience (National Institute of Mental Health, 2024).

235

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Autonomy

Personal autonomy is the ability of a person to make
their own decisions. In health this refers specifically to
decisions about their care.

Best interests

Clinicians and the courts seek to act in the best interests
of children and young people.
The need to act in someone’s best interests is outlined
in law.
For the Mental Capacity Act (MCA) 2005, decisions
for someone who cannot decide for themselves must
be made in their best interests. Under the Children Act
1989, in any decision of the court about a child (under
18), the welfare of the child must be paramount. For
these purposes, there is little or no material difference
between the welfare and best interests, and we have
used “best interests” throughout the report.
Although there is no standard definition of “best interests
of the child,” the General Medical Council advises that an
assessment of best interests will include what is clinically
indicated as well as additional factors such as the child
or young person’s views, the views of parents and others
close to the child or young person and cultural, religious
and other beliefs and values of the child or young person
(General Medical Council, 2018).
The Mental Capacity Act, Section 4 and extensive Court
of Protection case law, deals with the approach to best
interests under that legislation. Whether in the Court of
Protection or the High Court, when the court is asked to
make an assessment of a child or young person’s best
interests, it will consider their welfare/best interests in the
widest sense. This will include not just medical factors
but also social and psychological factors.

Binder

A binder is a purpose-built undergarment used to flatten
and reduce the appearance of breasts.

Case-mix

The mix of patients (cases) seen by a health service.

236

Glossary

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Child and
adolescent mental
health services

CAMHS

NHS children and young people’s mental health
services. CAMHS is a secondary care service for
children and young people under the age of 18, that
assess and treat young people with moderate to severe
mental health difficulties. There are local NHS CAMHS
services around the UK, with teams made up of nurses,
therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, support workers
and social workers, as well as other professionals
(Young Minds, n.d.).

Child and/or
young person

In law, everyone under 18 years of age is a child
(Children Act 1989) but we recognise that it may be more
appropriate to refer to those approaching the age of 18
as a young person, and that such young people may not
recognise themselves as a “child”.
In places, we have referred only to “young person”, or
only to “child”, for example where treatment in question
is only given towards the later stages of childhood,
closer to the age of 18, or in reference to the parent/
child relationship, in which they remain the parents’ child,
regardless of their age.
Otherwise, we have used the phrase “child and/or young
person” throughout the report for this reason only, and
do not intend there to be a material difference between
them other than that.

Cisgender

Used to describe a person whose personal identity and
gender identity is the same as their birth registered sex.

Cognitive

Relating to, or involving, the process of thinking and
reasoning.

Confidence
interval

A range around a measurement that conveys how
precise a measurement is.
In statistics, a confidence interval is a range of values
providing the estimate of an unknown parameter of a
population. A confidence interval uses a percentage level
to indicate the degree of uncertainty of its construction.
This percentage, known as the level of confidence, refers
to the proportion of the confidence interval that would
capture the true population parameter if the estimate
were repeated for numerous samples.

237

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

Confounder

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Something that affects the result of an experiment in
a way that makes it less clear that one thing causes
another, because it has an effect on one of the things
being measured (Cambridge Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary & Thesaurus, n.d.).
For example, mortality rates between two groups - one
consisting of heavy users of alcohol, one consisting
of teetotallers. You may conclude that heavy alcohol
use increases the risk of death, however, in reality the
situation may be more complex.
Alcohol use may not be the only mortality-affecting factor
that differs between the two groups, for example, those
who consume less alcohol may be more likely to eat a
healthier diet, or less likely to smoke, which may in turn
affect mortality. These other influencing factors are called
confounding variables. Ignoring confounding variables may
mean that
your results don’t reflect reality that well (Ilola, 2018).

Consent

Permission for a clinical intervention (such as an
examination, test or treatment) to happen. For consent
to be ‘informed’, information must be disclosed to the
person about relevant risks, benefits and alternatives
(including the option to take no action), and efforts made
to ensure that the information is understood.
In legal terms, consent is seen as needing:
1. capacity (or Gillick competence under 16) to make
the relevant decision
2. to be fully informed (i.e. the information provided
about the available options, the material risks
and benefits of each option, and of doing nothing,
“material” meaning (per the Montgomery Supreme
Court judgment in 2015) what a reasonable patient
would want to know, and what this patient actually
wants to know, NOT what a reasonable doctor would
tell them)
3. to be freely given (that is, without coercion).

238

Glossary

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Contraindications

A condition or circumstance that suggests or indicates
that a particular technique or drug should not be used
in the case in question. For example, having a bleeding
disorder is a contraindication for taking aspirin because
treatment with aspirin may cause excess bleeding.

Court of Appeal

(England and Wales) The Court of Appeal hears appeals
against both civil and criminal judgments from the Crown
Courts, High Court and County Court. It is second only
to the Supreme Court.

Detransition/
detransitioners

The process of discontinuing or reversing a gender
transition, often in connection with a change in how the
individual identifies or conceptualises their sex or gender
since initiating transition (MacKinnon et al., 2023).

Diagnostic
and Statistical
Manual of Mental
Disorders Fifth
edition

DSM-5

The standard classification of mental disorders
used by mental health professionals in the UK, and
internationally, published by the American Psychiatric
Association (2013).
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR)
(2022) is the latest version.

Diagnostic
formulation

The comprehensive assessment that includes a patient’s
history, results of psychological tests, and diagnosis of
mental health difficulties.

Divisional Court

(England and Wales) When the High Court of Justice of
England and Wales hears a case with at least two judges
sitting, it is referred to as the Divisional Court. This is
typically the case for certain judicial review cases (as
well as some criminal cases).

239

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

Dutch Approach

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Protocol published in 1998 by the Amsterdam child and
adolescent gender identity clinic (de Vries & CohenKettenis, 2012). The protocol set out that young people
being considered for treatment for gender dysphoria with
the use of puberty blockers must meet the following criteria:
• minimum age 12’
• life-long gender dysphoria increased around
puberty;
• psychologically stable without serious comorbid
psychiatric disorders that might interfere with the
diagnostic process; and
• have family support.

Endocrine
treatment

Sometimes referred to hormone treatment/therapy. In
relation to this clinical area, this term is used to describe
the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormones (see below)
and feminising and masculinising hormones (see below).

Endocrinologist

An endocrinologist is a medical doctor specialising in
diagnosing and treating disorders relating to problems
with the body’s hormones.

Endocrinology

The study of hormones.

Epidemiology

Epidemiology is the study of how often diseases occur
in different groups of people and why. This includes
the study of the distribution and determinants of healthrelated states or events in specified populations, and the
application of this study to the control of health problems
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012).

Exploratory
approaches

Therapeutic approaches that acknowledge the young
person’s subjective gender experience, whilst also
engaging in an open, curious, non-directive exploration
of the meaning of a range of experiences that may
connect to gender and broader self-identity (Bonfatto &
Crasnow, 2018; Churcher Clarke & Spiliadis, 2019;
Di Ceglie, 2009; Spiliadis, 2019).

240

Glossary

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Feminising and
masculinising
hormones
(also known
as cross-sex
hormones, and
gender affirming
hormones).

Sex hormones given as part of a medical transition
for gender dysphoric individuals (testosterone for
transgender males and oestrogen for transgender
females).

Gender dysphoria

Diagnostic term used by health professionals and
found in DSM-5 outlined above (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Gender dysphoria describes “a
marked incongruence between one’s experienced/
expressed gender and assigned gender of at least 6
months duration” which must be manifested by a number
of criterion.

Gender fluid

An experience of gender that is not fixed, but changes
between two or more identities

Gender identity

This term is used to describe an individual’s internal
sense of being male or female or something else.

Gender identity
development

The developmental experience of a child or young
person in seeking to understand their gender identity
over time.

Gender Identity
Development
Service

Gender
incongruence

GIDS

The service commissioned by NHS England for children
and adolescents with gender dysphoria. NHS England
decommissioned GIDS as part of a managed transition
of the service, initially to two new nationally networked
services (Phase 1 providers) based in specialist
children’s hospitals.
Diagnostic term used by health professionals, found in
the WHO International Classification of Diseases ICD-11
(see below).
Gender incongruence is characterised by “a marked
and persistent incongruence between an individual’s
experienced gender and the assigned sex”.

241

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Genderquestioning

A broad term used to describe children and young
people who are in a process of exploration about their
gender.

Gender-related
distress

A way of describing distress that may arise from a broad
range of experiences connected to a child or young
person’s gender identity development. Often used for
young people whereby any formal diagnosis of gender
dysphoria has not yet been made.

General
Practitioner

GP

A doctor who provides general medical treatment for
people who live in a particular area (Cambridge Advanced
Learner's Dictionary & Thesaurus, n.d.). GPs deal with a
whole range of health problems and manage the care of
their patients, referring onto specialists as appropriate.

Gillick
competence/
Fraser guidelines

A term derived from the legal case Gillick v West Norfolk
And Wisbech AHA, 1984 that is used to decide whether
a child or young person up to the age of 16 years is able
to consent to their own medical treatment, without the
need for parental permission or knowledge. A child or
young person will be ‘Gillick competent’ for that decision
if they have the necessary maturity and understanding to
make the decision.

Gonadotropin
GnRH
releasing hormone
analogues
(also known as
hormone blockers
and puberty
blockers)

Taking these hormones stops the progress of puberty.
The GnRH analogues (puberty blockers) act by
competing with the body’s natural gonadotrophin
releasing hormone. This competition blocks the release
of two gonadotrophin hormones important in puberty
called Follicular Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and
Luteinising Hormone (LH) from the pituitary gland.

High Court

The third highest court in the UK. It deals with all high
value and high importance civil law (non-criminal)
cases and appeals of decisions made in lower courts.
When the High Court sits with more than one judge,
as required for certain kinds of cases, it is called the
Divisional Court.

242

Glossary

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

International
Classification of
Diseases 11th
Revision

ICD-11

The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is a
globally used medical classification of anything that is
relevant to health care and is used clinically for medical
diagnosis. (https://icd.who.int/en).
It is developed and annually updated by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and is the mandatory global data
standard for recording health information. It is currently in
its 11th revision (ICD-11).

Living in stealth

Used to describe a person who is living as a member of
their identified gender without others being aware this is
different from their birth-registered sex.

Looked after
children

Children who are in the care of their Local Authority who
may be living with foster parents or in a residential care
setting.

Mega-analysis

An analytical process by which raw data is pooled
across studies (Eisenhauer, 2020).

Meta-analysis

Meta-analysis is the statistical combination of results
from two or more separate research studies that address
a similar research question to generate an average result
(Higgins et al,. 2023).

Minority stress

Ongoing stress - including discrimination, exclusion,
prejudice and violence - experienced by members of
minority groups living in a society that stigmatises their
identities (Meyer, 2003).

Multi-disciplinaryteam

MDT

The identified group of professional staff who provide a
clinical service. As a group they provide experience from
diverse disciplinary backgrounds.

Neurodevelopmental
disorders

The World Health Organization criteria (2022b) defines
neurodevelopmental disorders as “behavioural and
cognitive disorders that arise during the developmental
period that involve significant difficulties in the acquisition
and execution of specific intellectual, motor, or social
functions”.

Neurodiverse

“Neurodiversity” is a popular term that's used to describe
differences in the way people's brains work. It is a
combination of traits that are seen as both strengths
and challenges. ADHD (see above) is an example of
neurodiversity.
243

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Non-binary

A gender identity that does not fit into the traditional gender
binary of male and female (Twist & de Graaf, 2018).

Packer

A packer is an item (e.g. prosthetic device, fabric packer)
worn to create the appearance of male genitalia.

Paediatrics

The branch of medicine dealing with children and their
medical conditions.

Pass/passing

A person’s gender being seen and read in the way they
identify.

Precocious
puberty

This is when a child’s body begins changing into that of
an adult (puberty) early - before age 8 in girls and before
age 9 in boys.

Primary care

Primary care in the UK includes general practice,
community pharmacy, dental and optometry (eye health)
services. This tends to be the first point of access to
healthcare.

Pseudonymised

Patient confidentiality and anonymity is essential.
Sometimes to maintain this, patient information and data
needs to be presented in a format that ensures a person
is not identifiable. This is called Pseudonymisation.
Pseudonymisation is the de-identification of identifiable
patient-centric data item values through the use of
substitute values. Pseudonymised data can be linked
and used for secondary purposes, such as trend
analysis and peer comparison, without using identifiable
data items.

Psychological
formulation

A structured approach to understanding the factors
underlying distressing states in a way that informs the
changes needed and the therapeutic intervention for
these changes to occur.

Psychosocial

Describes the psychological and social factors that
encompass broader wellbeing.

Puberty blockers

See gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues above.

244

Glossary

TERM

Retransition

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

Resuming a gender transition following detransition.
Some people who have detransitioned may use this term
to:
• indicate restarting hormone therapy for medical
reasons, but without re-identifying as transgender.
• refer to re-identifying since initiating a gender
transition such as moving from a binary transgender
identity to non-binary.
• describe stopping or reversing transition
(MacKinnon et al., 2023).

Secondary care

Hospital and community health care services that do
not provide specialist care and are usually relatively
close to the patient. For children this will include Child
and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS), child
development and general paediatric services.

Service
specification

A service specification clearly defines the standards
of care expected from organisations funded by NHS
England to provide specialised care. The specifications
are developed by specialised clinicians, commissioners,
expert patients and public health representatives
to describe both core and developmental service
standards. Core standards are those that all funded
providers should be able to demonstrate, with
developmental standards being those which may
require further changes in practice over time to provide
excellence in the field.

Sex-of-rearing

The gender-specific upbringing by which a child is
brought up.
In children with Differences in Sex Development (DSD)
sex-of-rearing is decided by parents according to the
child’s biological birth sex (i.e. phenotype).

Social contagion

The spread of ideas, attitudes, or behaviour patterns in a
group through imitation and conformity (Colman, 2014).

245

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

TERM

A B B R E V I AT I O N

D ESCR I P T I O N

NHS specialised services support people with a range
of rare and complex conditions. Three factors determine
whether NHS England commissions a service as a
prescribed specialised service. These are:

Specialised
services

• The number of individuals who require the service;
• The cost of providing the service or facility;
The number of people able to provide the service or facility.
Tanner Stage

Tanner Staging, also known as Sexual Maturity Rating,
is a classification of puberty by stage of development.
This ranges from Stage 1, before physical signs
of puberty appear, to Stage 5 at full maturity. The
name originates from Professor JM Tanner, a child
development expert, was the first to identify the visible
stages of puberty.

Tertiary care

Tertiary care is the specialist end of the NHS. These
services relate to complex or rare conditions. Services are
usually delivered in a number of specialist hospitals/centres.

Transgender

trans

This is an umbrella term that includes a range of people
whose gender identity is different from the sex they were
registered at birth.

Transition

These are the steps a person may take to live in the
gender in which they identify. This may involve different
things, such as changing elements of social presentation
and role and/or medical intervention for some.

Watchful waiting

An approach by which a child/young person’s gender
journey is observed (without intervention) to see how
their gender identity and expression naturally evolves.

246

Glossary

This page is intentionally left blank
247

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

References

248

References

Abi-Jaoude, E., Naylor, K. T., & Pignatiello,
A. (2020). Smartphones, social media use
and Youth Mental Health. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 192(6). https://doi.
org/10.1503/cmaj.190434
AGREE Next Steps Consortium (2017). The
AGREE II Instrument [Electronic version].
https://www.agreetrust.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/12/AGREE-II-Users-Manual-and23-item-Instrument-2009-Update-2017.pdf
Aitken, M., Steensma, T. D., Blanchard,
R., VanderLaan, D. P., Wood, H., Fuentes,
A., Spegg, C., Wasserman, L., Ames, M.,
Fitzsimmons, C. L., Leef, J. H., Lishak, V., Reim,
E., Takagi, A., Vinik, J., Wreford, J., CohenKettenis, P. T., de Vries, A. L. C., Kreukels, B.
P. C., & Zucker, K. J. (2015). Evidence for an
altered sex ratio in clinic-referred adolescents
with gender dysphoria. The Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 12(3), 756–763. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jsm.12817
American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic And Statistical Manual Of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). https://doi.
org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596
American Psychiatric Association. (2022).
Diagnostic And Statistical Manual Of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision
(DSM-5-TR). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.
books.9780890425787
Arian, M., Haque, M., Johal, L., Mathur, P.,
Nel, W., Rais, A., Sandhu, R., & Sharma, S.
(2013). Maturation of the adolescent brain.
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 9,
449–461. https://doi.org/10.2147/ndt.s39776
Ashley, F., Parsa, N., kus, til, & MacKinnon,
K. R. (2023). Do gender assessments prevent
regret in transgender healthcare? A narrative
review. Psychology of Sexual Orientation
and Gender Diversity. https://doi.org/10.1037/
sgd0000672

Babu, R., & Shah, U. (2021). Gender identity
disorder (GID) in adolescents and adults with
differences of sex development (DSD): A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Pediatric Urology, 17(1), 39–47. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.11.017
Baker, K. E., Wilson, L. M., Sharma, R.,
Dukhanin, V., McArthur, K., & Robinson, K. A.
(2021). Hormone therapy, mental health, and
quality of life among transgender people: A
systematic review. Journal of the Endocrine
Society, 5(4). https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/
bvab011
Bakker, J. (2014). Sex Differentiation: Organizing
Effects of Sex Hormones. In: Kreukels, B.,
Steensma, T., de Vries, A. (eds) Gender
Dysphoria and Disorders of Sex Development.
Focus on Sexuality Research. Springer, Boston,
MA. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-7441-8_1
Balogh, E. P., Miller, B. T., Ball, J. R.,
Committee on Diagnostic Error in Health
Care, Board on Health Care Services, Institute
of Medicine, & The National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (Eds.).
(2015). Improving Diagnosis in Health Care.
National Academies Press (US). https://doi.
org/10.17226/21794
Baxendale, S. (2024). The impact of
suppressing puberty on neuropsychological
function: A Review. Acta Paediatrica. https://doi.
org/10.1111/apa.17150
Beck, D., Ferschmann, L., MacSweeney,
N., Norbom, L. B., Wiker, T., Aksnes, E.,
Karl, V., Dégeilh, F., Holm, M., Mills, K. L.,
Andreassen, O. A., Agartz, I., Westlye, L. T.,
von Soest, T., & Tamnes, C. K. (2023). Puberty
differentially predicts brain maturation in male
and female youth: A longitudinal ABCD study.
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience,
61, 101261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dcn.2023.101261

249

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Bell v Tavistock (Court of Appeal) [2021]
EWCA Civ 1363 https://www.judiciary.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2022/07/Bell-v-Tavistockjudgment-170921.pdf
Bell v Tavistock (Divisional Court) [2020]
EWHC 3274 (Admin) https://www.judiciary.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Bell-v-TavistockJudgment.pdf
Berenbaum, S. A., & Beltz, A. M. (2011). Sexual
differentiation of human behavior: Effects of
prenatal and pubertal organizational hormones.
Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 32(2), 183–
200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.03.001
Biggs, M. (2020). Gender dysphoria and
psychological functioning in adolescents
treated with gnrha: Comparing Dutch and
English prospective studies. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 49(7), 2231–2236. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10508-020-01764-1
Biggs, M. (2022). The Dutch protocol for juvenile
transsexuals: Origins and evidence. Journal of
Sex & Marital Therapy, 49(4), 348–368. https://
doi.org/10.1080/0092623x.2022.2121238
Blakemore, S.-J. (2018). Avoiding social
risk in adolescence. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 27(2), 116–122. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0963721417738144
BMJ. (2005). A new series starts: The ABC
of adolescence. BMJ, 330(7486). https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.330.7486.0-f
Bonfatto, M., & Crasnow, E. (2018). Gender/
Ed Identities: An overview of our current
work as child psychotherapists in the Gender
Identity Development Service. Journal of Child
Psychotherapy, 44(1), 29–46. https://doi.org/10.1
080/0075417x.2018.1443150
Boogers, L. S., Wiepjes, C. M., Klink, D. T.,
Hellinga, I., van Trotsenburg, A. S., den Heijer,
M., & Hannema, S. E. (2022). Transgender girls
grow tall: Adult height is unaffected by GnRH

250

analogue and estradiol treatment. The Journal
of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 107(9).
https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac349
Boyd, I., Hackett, T., & Bewley, S. (2022).
Care of transgender patients: A General
Practice Quality Improvement Approach.
Healthcare, 10(1), 121. https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare10010121
Butler, G., Adu-Gyamfi, K., Clarkson, K.,
El Khairi, R., Kleczewski, S., Roberts, A.,
Segal, T. Y., Yogamanoharan, K., Alvi, S.,
Amin, N., Carruthers, P., Dover, S., Eastman,
J., Mushtaq, T., Masic, U., & Carmichael,
P. (2022). Discharge outcome analysis of
1089 transgender young people referred
to paediatric endocrine clinics in England
2008–2021. Archives of Disease in Childhood,
107(11), 1018–1022. https://doi.org/10.1136/
archdischild-2022-324302
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary &
Thesaurus. (n.d.). Confounder. In dictionary.
cambridge.org. Retrieved April 2, 2024, from
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/
english/confounder
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary &
Thesaurus. (n.d.). GP. In dictionary.cambridge.
org. Retrieved April 2, 2024, from https://
dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/gp
Campbell, B., & Maddern, G. (2003). Safety
and efficacy of interventional procedures:
Scrutinising the evidence and issuing guidelines
without stifling innovation. BMJ, 326(7385), 347–
348. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.326.7385.347
Canvin, L., Hawthorne, O., & Panting, H.
(2022). Supporting young people to manage
gender-related distress using third-wave
cognitive behavioural theory, ideas and
Practice. Clinical Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 27(4), 1246–1262. https://doi.
org/10.1177/13591045211068729

References

Care Quality Commission (2021). The
Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust Gender Identity Service Inspection
Report. London: CQC. https://api.cqc.org.uk/
public/v1/reports/6e4fbf84-909c-46d7-835ccaf304cdd485?20221129062700
Carmichael, P., Butler, G., Masic, U., Cole, T. J.,
De Stavola, B. L., Davidson, S., Skageberg, E.
M., Khadr, S., & Viner, R. M. (2021). Short-term
outcomes of pubertal suppression in a selected
cohort of 12 to 15 year old young people with
persistent gender dysphoria in the UK. PLOS
ONE, 16(2). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0243894
Carswell, J. M., Lopez, X., & Rosenthal, S. M.
(2022). The Evolution of Adolescent GenderAffirming Care: An Historical Perspective.
Hormone research in paediatrics, 95(6), 649–
656. https://doi.org/10.1159/000526721
Cass, H. (2022). Independent Review of Gender
Identity Services for Children and Young
People: Interim report. https://cass.independentreview.uk/publications/interim-report/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(2012). Principles of Epidemiology in Public
Health Practice: An introduction to Applied
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 3rd ed. https://
archive.cdc.gov/#/details?url=https://www.cdc.
gov/csels/dsepd/ss1978/SS1978.pdf
Centre for Medical Ethics and Law HKU.
(2024, January 12). Wyng-Hatton Lecture
2023: Smart regulation for medical innovation
[Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=zBNXDqax91o
Chen, D., Abrams, M., Clark, L., Ehrensaft, D.,
Tishelman, A. C., Chan, Y.-M., Garofalo, R.,
Olson-Kennedy, J., Rosenthal, S. M., & Hidalgo,
M. A. (2021). Psychosocial characteristics of
transgender youth seeking gender-affirming
medical treatment: Baseline findings from
the Trans Youth Care Study. Journal of

Adolescent Health, 68(6), 1104–1111. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.07.033
Chen, D., Berona, J., Chan, Y.-M., Ehrensaft,
D., Garofalo, R., Hidalgo, M. A., Rosenthal,
S. M., Tishelman, A. C., & Olson-Kennedy, J.
(2023). Psychosocial functioning in transgender
youth after 2 years of hormones. New England
Journal of Medicine, 388(3), 240–250. https://
doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2206297
Children’s Commissioner for England. (2023).
‘A lot of it is actually just abuse’ - Young
people and pornography. https://www.
childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/resource/a-lotof-it-is-actually-just-abuse-young-people-andpornography/
Chiniara, L. N., Bonifacio, H. J., & Palmert,
M. R. (2018). Characteristics of adolescents
referred to a gender clinic: Are youth seen now
different from those in initial reports? Hormone
Research in Paediatrics, 89(6), 434–441. https://
doi.org/10.1159/000489608
Churcher Clarke, A., & Spiliadis, A. (2019).
‘taking the lid off the box’: The value
of Extended Clinical Assessment for
adolescents presenting with gender identity
difficulties. Clinical Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 24(2), 338–352. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1359104518825288
Cochrane. (2016, January 27). What are
systematic reviews?. [Video]. YouTube. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=egJlW4vkb1Y
Cohen, E., Mackenzie, R. G., & Yates, G.
L. (1991). HEADSS, a Psychosocial Risk
Assessment Instrument: Implications for
designing effective intervention programs for
runaway youth. Journal of Adolescent Health,
12(7), 539–544. https://doi.org/10.1016/01970070(91)90084-y
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., & Gooren, L. J. G. (1999).
Transsexualism. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 46(4), 315–333. https://doi.
251

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

org/10.1016/s0022-3999(98)00085-3

minors: 18 years of experience of the Gender
Identity Unit of Catalonia. Spanish Journal of
Psychiatry and Mental Health, 17(1), 35–40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rpsm.2022.02.001

Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., & van Goozen, S. H.
(1998). Pubertal delay as an aid in diagnosis
and treatment of a transsexual adolescent.
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 7(4),
de Graaf, N. M., Giovanardi, G., Zitz, C., &
246–248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s007870050073 Carmichael, P. (2018). Sex ratio in children and
adolescents referred to the Gender Identity
Coleman, E., Radix, A. E., Bouman, W. P.,
Development Service in the UK (2009–2016).
Brown, G. R., de Vries, A. L., Deutsch, M. B.,
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 47(5), 1301–1304.
Ettner, R., Fraser, L., Goodman, M., Green, J.,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-018-1204-9
Hancock, A. B., Johnson, T. W., Karasic, D.
H., Knudson, G. A., Leibowitz, S. F., Meyerde Graaf, N. M., Steensma, T. D., Carmichael,
Bahlburg, H. F., Monstrey, S. J., Motmans, J.,
P., VanderLaan, D. P., Aitken, M., CohenNahata, L., … Arcelus, J. (2022). Standards of
Kettenis, P. T., de Vries, A. L., Kreukels, B.
care for the health of transgender and gender
P., Wasserman, L., Wood, H., & Zucker, K. J.
diverse people, version 8. International Journal
(2020). Suicidality in clinic-referred transgender
of Transgender Health, 23(sup1). https://doi.org/ adolescents. European Child & Adolescent
10.1080/26895269.2022.2100644
Psychiatry, 31(1), 67–83. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00787-020-01663-9
Colman, A. M. (2014). Social contagion.
In A Dictionary of Psychology (3 ed.).
de Vries, A. L. C., Doreleijers, T. A. H.,
Oxford Reference. Oxford University Press.
Steensma, T. D., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
Retrieved April 2, 2024, from https://www.
(2011a). Psychiatric comorbidity in gender
oxfordreference.com/display/10.1093/
dysphoric adolescents. Journal of Child
acref/9780199534067.001.0001/
Psychology and Psychiatry, 52(11), 1195–1202.
acref-9780199534067-ehttps://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02426.x
7741?rskey=eqJu3z&result=8033
de Vries, A. L. C., McGuire, J. K., Steensma,
Condat, A., Mendes, N., & Cohen, D. (2022).
T. D., Wagenaar, E. C. F., Doreleijers, T. A.
Variations in genital development, gender
H., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2014). Young
identities and consent to care. Bulletin
adult psychological outcome after puberty
de l’Académie Nationale de Médecine,
suppression and gender reassignment.
206(3), 418–423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Pediatrics, 134(4), 696–704. https://doi.
banm.2021.12.014
org/10.1542/peds.2013-2958
Davis, J. T., & Hines, M. (2020). How large
are gender differences in toy preferences?
A systematic review and meta-analysis
of Toy Preference Research. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 49(2), 373–394. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10508-019-01624-7
De Castro, C., Solerdelcoll, M., Plana, M. T.,
Halperin, I., Mora, M., Ribera, L., CasteloBranco, C., Gómez-Gil, E., & Vidal, A. (2024).
High persistence in Spanish transgender

252

de Vries, A. L. C., Steensma, T. D., Doreleijers,
T. A. H., & Cohen‐Kettenis, P. T. (2011b).
Puberty suppression in adolescents with gender
identity disorder: A prospective follow‐up
study. The Journal of Sexual Medicine, 8(8),
2276–2283. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17436109.2010.01943.x
de Vries, A. L., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2012).
Clinical management of gender dysphoria in
children and adolescents: The Dutch approach.

References

Journal of Homosexuality, 59(3), 301–320.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653300

Journal of Transgenderism 5(4). http://www.
symposion.com/ijt/ijtvo06no01_01.htm

de Vries, A. L., Kreukels, B. P., Steensma,
T. D., & McGuire, J. K. (2013). Gender
Identity Development: A biopsychosocial
perspective. Gender Dysphoria and Disorders
of Sex Development, 53–80. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4614-7441-8_3

Di Ceglie, D. (2009). Engaging young people
with atypical gender identity development in
therapeutic work: A developmental approach.
Journal of Child Psychotherapy, 35(1), 3–12.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00754170902764868

de Vries, A. L., Noens, I. L., Cohen-Kettenis, P.
T., van Berckelaer-Onnes, I. A., & Doreleijers, T.
A. (2010). Autism spectrum disorders in gender
dysphoric children and adolescents. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 40(8),
930–936. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-0100935-9
de Vries, A. L., Steensma, T. D., CohenKettenis, P. T., VanderLaan, D. P., & Zucker, K.
J. (2015). Poor peer relations predict parent- and
self-reported behavioral and emotional problems
of adolescents with gender dysphoria: A crossnational, cross-clinic comparative analysis.
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 25(6),
579–588. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-0150764-7
Delemarre-van de Waal, H. A., & CohenKettenis, P. T. (2006). Clinical management
of gender identity disorder in adolescents:
A protocol on psychological and Paediatric
Endocrinology aspects. European Journal
of Endocrinology, 155(suppl_1). https://doi.
org/10.1530/eje.1.02231
deMayo, B. E., Jordan, A. E., & Olson, K. R.
(2022). Gender development in gender diverse
children. Annual Review of Developmental
Psychology, 4(1), 207–229. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-devpsych-121020-034014
Di Ceglie D, Freedman D, Mc Pherson S,
Richardson P. (2002). Children and Adolescents
Referred to a Specialist Gender Identity
Development Service: Clinical Features and
Demographic Characteristics. International

Drummond, K. D., Bradley, S. J., PetersonBadali, M., & Zucker, K. J. (2008). A follow-up
study of girls with gender identity disorder.
Developmental Psychology, 44(1), 34–45.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.1.34
Ehrensaft, D. (2017). Gender nonconforming
youth: Current perspectives. Adolescent Health,
Medicine and Therapeutics, Volume 8, 57–67.
https://doi.org/10.2147/ahmt.s110859
Ehrensaft, D., Giammattei, S. V., Storck, K.,
Tishelman, A. C., & St. Amand, C. (2018).
Prepubertal social gender transitions: What
we know; what we can learn—a view from a
gender affirmative lens. International Journal of
Transgenderism, 19(2), 251–268. https://doi.org/
10.1080/15532739.2017.1414649
Eisenhauer, J. G. (2020). Meta‐analysis and
mega‐analysis: A simple introduction. Teaching
Statistics, 43(1), 21–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/
test.12242
Elkadi, J., Chudleigh, C., Maguire, A. M.,
Ambler, G. R., Scher, S., & Kozlowska, K.
(2023). Developmental pathway choices of
young people presenting to a gender service
with gender distress: A prospective followup study. Children, 10(2), 314. https://doi.
org/10.3390/children10020314
General Medical Council. (2018). 0-18 years –
guidance for all doctors.
General Medical Council. (2020). Decision
making and consent.
General Medical Council. (2021). Good practice
in prescribing and managing medicines and
253

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

devices (76-78).
General Pharmaceutical Council. (n.d.).
What does a pharmacist do? Retrieved
March 5, 2024, from https://www.
pharmacyregulation.org/raising-concerns/
raising-concerns-about-pharmacyprofessional/what-expect-your-pharmacy/
what-does-0#:~:text=Pharmacists%20are%20
responsible%20for%3A&text=ensuring%20
that%20the%20supply%20of,occur%20and%20
answering%20patients%27%20questions
Giedd, J. N. (2016). The amazing teen
brain. Scientific American. https://www.
scientificamerican.com/article/the-amazingteen-brain/
Glintborg, D., Møller, J.-J. K., Rubin, K. H.,
Lidegaard, Ø., T’Sjoen, G., Larsen, M.-L. J.,
Hilden, M., & Andersen, M. S. (2023). Genderaffirming treatment and mental health diagnoses
in Danish transgender persons: A nationwide
register-based Cohort Study. European Journal
of Endocrinology, 189(3), 336–345. https://doi.
org/10.1093/ejendo/lvad119
Goddings, A., Beltz, A., Peper, J. S., Crone,
E. A., & Braams, B. R. (2019). Understanding
the role of puberty in structural and functional
development of the Adolescent Brain. Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 29(1), 32–53. https://
doi.org/10.1111/jora.12408
González-Herrero, B., Morgante, F.,
Pagonabarraga, J., Stanton, B., & Edwards,
M. J. (2022). Autism spectrum disorder may
be highly prevalent in people with functional
neurological disorders. Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 12(1), 299. https://doi.org/10.3390/
jcm12010299
GRADE working group. (n.d.). Welcome to
the GRADE Working Group. GRADE working
group. https://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/
Green, R., Roberts, C. W., Williams, K.,
Goodman, M., & Mixon, A. (1987). Specific
254

cross-gender behaviour in boyhood and
later homosexual orientation. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 151(1), 84–88. https://doi.
org/10.1192/bjp.151.1.84
Hall, R., Mitchell, L., & Sachdeva, J. (2021).
Access to care and frequency of detransition
among a cohort discharged by a UK national
adult gender identity clinic: Retrospective casenote review. BJPsych Open, 7(6). https://doi.
org/10.1192/bjo.2021.1022
Hall, R., Taylor, J., Heathcote, C., Langton,
T., Hewitt, C. E. & Fraser, L. (2024). Gender
services for children and adolescents across
the EU-15+ countries: an online survey.
Archives of Disease in Childhood, Published
Online First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
archdischild-2023-326348
Hall, R., Taylor, J., Hewitt, C. E., Heathcote, C.,
Jarvis, S.W., Langton, T., & Fraser, L. (2024).
Impact of social transition in relation to gender
for children and adolescents: a systematic
review. Archives of Disease in Childhood,
Published Online First: April 2024. https://doi.
org/10.1136/archdischild-2023-326112
Hanson, E. (n.d.). What is the impact of
pornography on young people? A research
briefing for educators. cht.nhs.uk. https://
sexualhealth.cht.nhs.uk/fileadmin/sexualHealth/
contentUploads/Documents/What_is_the_
impact_of_pornography_on_young_people__A_research_briefing_for_educators.pdf
Havighurst, S. S., & Downey, L. (2009). Clinical
reasoning for child and adolescent mental health
practitioners: The mindful formulation. Clinical
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 14(2), 251–
271. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359104508100888
Heathcote, C., Taylor, J., Hall, R., Jarvis,
S., Langton, T., Hewitt, C. E., & Fraser, L.
(2024). Psychosocial support interventions for
children and adolescents experiencing gender
dysphoria or incongruence: a systematic review.

References

Archives of Disease in Childhood, Published
Online First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
archdischild-2023-326347
Hidalgo, M. A., Ehrensaft, D., Tishelman, A.
C., Clark, L. F., Garofalo, R., Rosenthal, S. M.,
Spack, N. P., & Olson, J. (2013). The gender
affirmative model: What we know and what we
aim to learn. Human Development, 56(5), 285–
290. https://doi.org/10.1159/000355235
Higgins, J. P. T., Thomas, J., Chandler, J.,
Cumpston, M., Li, T., Page, M. J., Welch,
V. A. (editors). (updated August 2023).
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews
of Interventions version 6.4. Cochrane. www.
training.cochrane.org/handbook.
Hines, M. (2015). Gendered development.
Handbook of Child Psychology and
Developmental Science, 1–46. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781118963418.childpsy320
Hines, M. (2020a). Human gender development.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
118, 89–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2020.07.018
Hines, M. (2020b). Neuroscience and sex/
gender: Looking back and forward. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 40(1), 37–43. https://doi.
org/10.1523/jneurosci.0750-19.2019
Hoffmann-Eßer, W., Siering, U., Neugebauer,
E. A., Brockhaus, A. C., McGauran, N., &
Eikermann, M. (2018). Guideline appraisal
with AGREE II: Online survey of the
potential influence of agree II items on
overall assessment of guideline quality and
recommendation for use. BMC Health Services
Research, 18(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913018-2954-8
Holland, G., & Tiggemann, M. (2016). A
systematic review of the impact of the use
of social networking sites on body image
and disordered eating outcomes. Body
image, 17, 100–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

bodyim.2016.02.008
Holt, V., Skagerberg, E., & Dunsford, M.
(2014). Young people with features of gender
dysphoria: Demographics and associated
difficulties. Clinical Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 21(1), 108–118. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1359104514558431
Ilola, E. (2019, November 28). A beginner’s
Guide to Confounding. Students 4 Best
Evidence. https://s4be.cochrane.org/
blog/2018/10/01/a-beginners-guide-toconfounding/#:~:text=People%20who%20
consume%20less%20alcohol,factors%20
are%20called%20confounding%20variables
Jackson, D. (2023). Suicide-related outcomes
following gender-affirming treatment: A Review.
Cureus. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.36425
Jayatissa, K. A. (2023). Generation Z – A new
lifeline: A systematic literature review. Sri Lanka
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities,
3(2), 179–186. https://doi.org/10.4038/sljssh.
v3i2.110
Kaltiala, R., Holttinen, T., & Tuisku, K. (2023).
Have the psychiatric needs of people seeking
gender reassignment changed as their numbers
increase? A register study in Finland. European
Psychiatry, 66(1). https://doi.org/10.1192/j.
eurpsy.2023.2471
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Bergman, H., Työläjärvi,
M., & Frisén, L. (2018). Gender dysphoria in
adolescence: current perspectives. Adolescent
health, medicine and therapeutics, 9, 31–41.
https://doi.org/10.2147/AHMT.S135432
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Sumia, M., Työläjärvi, M.,
& Lindberg, N. (2015). Two years of gender
identity service for minors: overrepresentation
of natal girls with severe problems in adolescent
development. Child and adolescent psychiatry
and mental health, 9, 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13034-015-0042-y

255

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Karamanis, G., Karalexi, M., White, R., Frisell,
T., Isaksson, J., Skalkidou, A., & Papadopoulos,
F. C. (2022). Gender dysphoria in twins: a
register-based population study. Scientific
reports, 12(1), 13439. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-022-17749-0
Karvonen, M., Karukivi, M., Kronström, K., &
Kaltiala, R. (2022). The nature of co-morbid
psychopathology in adolescents with gender
dysphoria. Psychiatry Research, 317, 114896.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114896
Kelly, Y., Zilanawala, A., Booker, C., & Sacker,
A. (2018). Social Media Use and Adolescent
Mental Health: Findings from the UK millennium
cohort study. EClinicalMedicine, 6, 59–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2018.12.005
Klink, D., & Den Heijer, M. (2013). Genetic
aspects of gender identity development and
gender dysphoria. Gender Dysphoria and
Disorders of Sex Development, 25–51. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-7441-8_2

Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaac.2024.01.017
Kuper, L. E., Stewart, S., Preston, S., Lau, M.,
& Lopez, X. (2020). Body dissatisfaction and
mental health outcomes of youth on genderaffirming hormone therapy. Pediatrics, 145(4).
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-3006
Lai, M.-C., Kassee, C., Besney, R., Bonato, S.,
Hull, L., Mandy, W., Szatmari, P., & Ameis, S.
H. (2019). Prevalence of co-occurring mental
health diagnoses in the autism population:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. The
Lancet Psychiatry, 6(10), 819–829. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s2215-0366(19)30289-5
Larsen, B., & Luna, B. (2018). Adolescence
as a neurobiological critical period for the
development of higher-order cognition.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
94, 179–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2018.09.005

Kohlberg, L. (1966). A cognitive-developmental
analysis of children’s sex-role concepts
and attitudes. In E. E. M&ccoby (Ed.), The
development of sex differences. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1966.

Lavender, R., Shaw, S., Maninger, J.-K., Butler,
G., Carruthers, P., Carmichael, P., & Masic,
U. (2023). Impact of hormone treatment on
psychosocial functioning in gender-diverse
young people. LGBT Health, 10(5), 382–390.
https://doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2022.0201

Kozlowska, K., McClure, G., Chudleigh, C.,
Maguire, A. M., Gessler, D., Scher, S., &
Ambler, G. R. (2021). Australian children and
adolescents with gender dysphoria: Clinical
presentations and challenges experienced
by a multidisciplinary team and Gender
Service. Human Systems: Therapy, Culture
and Attachments, 1(1), 70–95. https://doi.
org/10.1177/26344041211010777

Lee, W. G., Butler, G., Carmichael, P.,
Rashid, T., Yasmin, E., Morley, R., Barrett,
J., Christopher, N., & Sangster, P. (2023).
Urological and gynaecological considerations
for the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
analogues in transgender and nonbinary
adolescents: A narrative review. European
Urology Focus, 9(1), 35–41. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.euf.2022.11.002

Krebs, G., Clark, B., Ford, T., & Stringaris, A.
(2024). Epidemiology of Body Dysmorphic
Disorder and Appearance Preoccupation
in Youth: Prevalence, Comorbidity and
Psychosocial Impairment. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent

Littman, L. (2021). Individuals treated for
gender dysphoria with medical and/or surgical
transition who subsequently detransitioned:
A survey of 100 detransitioners. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 50(8), 3353–3369. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10508-021-02163-w

256

References

Loi-Koe, O., Catanzano, M., & Butler, G.
(2018.). Effect of pubertal blockade and crosssex hormone treatment on the growth spurt
in young transgender adolescents: a first
report. Hormone Research in Paediatrics.
Pituitary, neuroendocrinology and puberty.
ESPE Abstracts (2018) 89 P-P1-211 https://doi.
org/10.3252/pso.eu.57ESPE.2018
Ludvigsson, J. F., Adolfsson, J., Höistad,
M., Rydelius, P., Kriström, B., & Landén,
M. (2023). A systematic review of hormone
treatment for children with gender dysphoria
and recommendations for Research. Acta
Paediatrica, 112(11), 2279–2292. https://doi.
org/10.1111/apa.16791
MacKinnon, K. R., Expósito-Campos, P.,
& Gould, W. A. (2023). Detransition needs
further understanding, not controversy. BMJ;
381:e073584. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2022073584
Martino, D., Berg, L., Lerario, M., & Pringsheim,
T. (2023). The association between Gender
Minority Identity and functional tic-like behaviors
during the COVID-19 pandemic (P11-11.013).
Neurology, 100(17_supplement_2). https://doi.
org/10.1212/wnl.0000000000203064
Masic, U., Butler, G., Carruthers, P., &
Carmichael, P. (2022). Trajectories of
transgender adolescents referred for endocrine
intervention in England. Archives of Disease
in Childhood, 107(11), 1012–1017. https://doi.
org/10.1136/archdischild-2022-324283
Mavergames, C., Elliott, J. (n.d.). Living
systematic reviews: towards real-time evidence
for health-care decision making. In: BMJ
Best Practice. Evidence-based medicine
(EBM) toolkit. Retrieved April 2, 2024, from
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/toolkit/discuss-ebm/
living-systematic-reviews-towards-real-timeevidence-for-health-care-decision-making

McPherson, S., & Freedman, D. E. (2023).
Psychological outcomes of 12–15-year-olds
with gender dysphoria receiving pubertal
suppression in the UK: Assessing reliable and
clinically significant change. Journal of Sex &
Marital Therapy, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/00
92623x.2023.2281986
Mental Health Law Online. Mental Capacity Act
(MCA) 2005 s4. (2006, December 16). https://
www.mentalhealthlaw.co.uk/MCA_2005_s4
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress,
and Mental Health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual
populations: Conceptual issues and research
evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129(5), 674–
697. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. (2005). Gender identity
outcome in female-raised 46,XY persons
with penile agenesis, cloacal exstrophy of
the bladder, or penile ablation. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 34(4), 423–438. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10508-005-4342-9
MindEd. (2023). MindEd Supporting Children
and Young People With Gender-related
Questions Or Distress And Their Sexual
Orientation. https://www.minded.org.uk/
Catalogue/
Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board
(Scotland) (Supreme Court) [2015] UKSC 11
https://www.supremecourt.uk/cases/docs/uksc2013-0136-judgment.pdf
Morgan, C., Webb, R. T., Carr, M. J.,
Kontopantelis, E., Green, J., Chew-Graham,
C. A., Kapur, N., & Ashcroft, D. M. (2017).
Incidence, clinical management, and mortality
risk following self harm among children and
adolescents: Cohort study in primary care. BMJ.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4351
Mueller, S. C., Guillamon, A., ZubiaurreElorza, L., Junque, C., Gomez-Gil, E., Uribe,
C., Khorashad, B. S., Khazai, B., Talaei, A.,
Habel, U., Votinov, M., Derntl, B., Lanzenberger,
257

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

R., Seiger, R., Kranz, G. S., Kreukels, B. P.
C., Kettenis, P. T., Burke, S. M., Lambalk, N.
B., … Luders, E. (2021). The neuroanatomy of
transgender identity: Mega-analytic findings
from the Enigma Transgender Persons Working
Group. The Journal of Sexual Medicine,
18(6), 1122–1129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsxm.2021.03.079
Murad, M. H., Mustafa, R. A., Schünemann,
H. J., Sultan, S., & Santesso, N. (2017). Rating
the certainty in evidence in the absence of
a single estimate of effect. Evidence Based
Medicine, 22(3), 85–87. https://doi.org/10.1136/
ebmed-2017-110668

National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (2020a). Evidence Review:
Gonadotrophin Releasing Hormone Analogues
for Children and Adolescents with Gender
Dysphoria.
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (2020b). Evidence review: genderaffirming hormones for children and adolescents
with gender dysphoria.
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (2021). Shared decision making.

National Institute of Mental Health. (2024,
February). Autism spectrum disorder. https://
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/autismNadrowski, K. (2023). A new flight from
spectrum-disorders-asd#:~:text=Autism%20
womanhood? the importance of working through
spectrum%20disorder%20%28ASD%29%20
experiences related to exposure to pornographic
is%20a%20neurological%20and,appear%20
content in girls affected by gender dysphoria.
in%20the%20first%202%20years%20of%20life.
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 1–10. https://
doi.org/10.1080/0092623x.2023.2276149
NHS Commissioning Board (2012, December).
Developing Operational Delivery Networks: The
National Child Mortality Database (NCMD).
Way Forward. https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp(2023). Child Death Review Data Release: Year
content/uploads/2012/12/develop-odns.pdf
ending 31 March 2023. https://www.ncmd.info/
publications/child-death-data-2023/
NHS Digital. (2018, November 22). Mental
Health of children and young people in England,
National Child Mortality Database. (2021,
2017: Trends and characteristics. https://files.
October). Suicide in Children and Young People
digital.nhs.uk/A0/273EE3/MHCYP%202017%20
- National Child Mortality Database Programme
Trends%20Characteristics.pdf
Thematic Report. National Child Mortality
Database. https://www.ncmd.info/wp-content/
NHS Digital. (2023, November 21). Mental
uploads/2021/11/NCMD-Suicide-in-ChildrenHealth of Children and Young People in
and-Young-People-Report.pdf
England, 2023 - wave 4 follow up to the
2017 survey. https://digital.nhs.uk/dataNational Institute for Health and Care
and-information/publications/statistical/
Excellence (2012): Methods for the development
mental-health-of-children-and-young-peopleof NICE public health guidance (third edition),
in-england/2023-wave-4-follow-up/part-1Appendix D Glossary of study designs. NICE
mental-health
process and methods [PMG4]
NHS England. (2019, December 30). NHS
National Institute for Health and Care
STANDARD CONTRACT FOR GENDER
Excellence (2017). Autism spectrum disorder in
IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT SERVICE FOR
under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis.
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS. https://www.
NICE clinical guideline CG128. Last updated: 20
england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/
Dec 2017
gender-development-service-children258

References

adolescents.pdf
NHS England. (2020, July). Methods: National
clinical policies. Methods of development
and approval of national clinical policies for
directly commissioned specialised services.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2016/12/Methods-National-clinicalpolicies-updated-July-2020-v2.pdf
NHS England. (2023, June 30) NHS Long Term
Workforce Plan. https://www.england.nhs.uk/
publication/nhs-long-term-workforce-plan/
NHS England. (2024, March 12). Clinical policy:
Puberty suppressing hormones (PSH) for
children and young people who have gender
incongruence / gender dysphoria [1927]. https://
www.england.nhs.uk/publication/clinical-policypuberty-suppressing-hormones/
NHS Long Term Plan. (2019, January 7). The
NHS Long Term Plan. NHS England. https://
www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/publication/nhs-longterm-plan/
NIHRtv. (2010, April 22). Systematic Reviews
[Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=mAAfvXZPHtE
Nilles, C., Pringsheim, T. M., & Martino,
D. (2022). The recent surge of functional
movement disorders: social distress or greater
awareness?. Current opinion in neurology,
35(4), 485–493. https://doi.org/10.1097/
WCO.0000000000001074
Nolan, B. J., Zwickl, S., Locke, P., Zajac, J.
D., & Cheung, A. S. (2023). Early access to
testosterone therapy in transgender and genderdiverse adults seeking masculinization. JAMA
Network Open, 6(9). https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2023.31919
Office for National Statistics. (2023a,
January 6). Gender Identity, England and
Wales: Census 2021. https://www.ons.
gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/

culturalidentity/genderidentity/bulletins/
genderidentityenglandandwales/census2021
Office for National Statistics. (2023b, January
25). Gender identity: age and sex, England and
Wales: Census 2021 https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/culturalidentity/
genderidentity/articles/
Office for National Statistics. (2023c,
November 8). Quality of Census 2021
Gender Identity Data. https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/culturalidentity/
genderidentity/articles/
Office for National Statistics. (2023d, November
1). Sexual orientation and gender identity quality
information for census 2021. https://www.
ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/
culturalidentity/sexuality/methodologies/
Olson, K. R., Durwood, L., Horton, R.,
Gallagher, N. M., & Devor, A. (2022). Gender
identity 5 years after Social Transition.
Pediatrics, 150(2). https://doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2021-056082
Olson-Kennedy, J., Chan, Y.-M., Rosenthal, S.,
Hidalgo, M. A., Chen, D., Clark, L., Ehrensaft,
D., Tishelman, A., & Garofalo, R. (2019).
Creating the Trans Youth Research Network: A
collaborative research endeavor. Transgender
Health, 4(1), 304–312. https://doi.org/10.1089/
trgh.2019.0024
Olson-Kennedy, J., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.,
Kreukels, B. P., Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F., Garofalo,
R., Meyer, W., & Rosenthal, S. M. (2016).
Research priorities for gender nonconforming/
transgender youth: gender identity development
and biopsychosocial outcomes. Current
opinion in endocrinology, diabetes, and
obesity, 23(2), 172–179. https://doi.org/10.1097/
MED.0000000000000236
OpenMD. (2021, July 17). Levels of evidence.
Levels of Evidence in Medical Research. https://
openmd.com/guide/levels-of-evidence
259

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Public Health England. (2019, October).
Establishing the evidence base for
‘multiple site single service’ (MSSS)
models of care, Systematic review.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
media/5dbc0e89ed915d1cff49f424/multiple_
site_single_service.pdf

Ruuska, S. M., Tuisku, K., Holttinen, T., &
Kaltiala, R. (2024). All-cause and suicide
mortalities among adolescents and young adults
who contacted specialised gender identity
services in Finland in 1996-2019: a register
study. BMJ mental health, 27(1). https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmjment-2023-300940

Rautio, D., Gumpert, M., Jassi, A., Krebs, G.,
Flygare, O., Andrén, P., Monzani, B., Peile, L.,
Jansson-Fröjmark, M., Lundgren, T., Hillborg,
M., Silverberg-Mörse, M., Clark, B., Fernández
de la Cruz, L., & Mataix-Cols, D. (2022).
Effectiveness of Multimodal Treatment for
Young People With Body Dysmorphic Disorder
in Two Specialist Clinics. Behavior therapy,
53(5), 1037–1049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
beth.2022.04.010

Sisk, C. L., & Zehr, J. L. (2005). Pubertal
hormones organize the adolescent brain and
behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology,
26(3–4), 163–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
yfrne.2005.10.003

Ravindranath, O., Calabro, F. J., Foran, W.,
& Luna, B. (2022). Pubertal development
underlies optimization of inhibitory control
through specialization of ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex. Developmental cognitive neuroscience,
58, 101162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dcn.2022.101162
Rawee, P., Rosmalen, JGM., Kalverdijk, L.,
Burke, SM. (2024). Development of Gender
Non-Contentedness During Adolescence and
Early Adulthood. Archives of Sexual Behaviour.
Epub ahead of print. https://doi: 10.1007/s10508024-02817-5.
Ristori, J., & Steensma, T. D. (2016). Gender
dysphoria in childhood. International review of
psychiatry (Abingdon, England), 28(1), 13–20.
https://doi.org/10.3109/09540261.2015.1115754
Ristori, J., Cocchetti, C., Romani, A., Mazzoli,
F., Vignozzi, L., Maggi, M., & Fisher, A. D.
(2020). Brain Sex Differences Related to
Gender Identity Development: Genes or
Hormones?. International journal of molecular
sciences, 21(6), 2123. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms21062123

260

Skills for Health, Health Education England and
Skill for Care 2016. (2016). Mental Health Core
Skills Education and Training Framework. Skills
for Health. https://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2021/07/CSTF-Eng-SubjectGuide-v1.1.pdf
Skordis, N., Butler, G., de Vries, M. C., Main,
K., & Hannema, S. E. (2019). ESPE and PES
International Survey of Centers and Clinicians
Delivering Specialist Care for Children and
Adolescents with Gender Dysphoria. Hormone
Research in Paediatrics, 90(5), 326–331. https://
doi.org/10.1159/000496115
Spiliadis, A. (2019). Towards a gender
exploratory model: Slowing things down,
opening things up and exploring identity
development. Metalogos Systemic Therapy
Journal, 35. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/334559847_Towards_a_Gender_
Exploratory_Model_slowing_things_down_
opening_things_up_and_exploring_identity_
development
Steensma, T. D., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2011).
Gender transitioning before puberty? Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 40(4), 649–650. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10508-011-9752-2
Steensma, T. D., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2015).
More than two developmental pathways in
children with gender dysphoria? Journal of

References

the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 54(2), 147–148. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaac.2014.10.016
Steensma, T. D., Biemond, R., de Boer, F., &
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2011). Desisting and
persisting gender dysphoria after childhood:
A qualitative follow-up study. Clinical Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 16(4), 499–516.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1359104510378303

guidelines for children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
a systematic review of recommendations (part
2). Archives of Disease in Childhood, Published
Online First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
archdischild-2023-326500

Taylor, J., Hall, R., Heathcote, Hewitt, C. E.,
C., Langton, T., & Fraser, L. (2024). Clinical
guidelines for children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
Steensma, T. D., Kreukels, B. P. C., de Vries,
a systematic review of guideline quality (part 1).
A. L. C., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2013a).
Archives of Disease in Childhood, Published
Gender Identity Development in adolescence.
Online First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
Hormones and Behavior, 64(2), 288–297. https://
archdischild-2023-326499
doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2013.02.020
Taylor, J., Hall, R., Langton, T., Fraser, L., &
Steensma, T. D., McGuire, J. K., Kreukels, B.
Hewitt, C. E. (2024). Characteristics of children
P. C., Beekman, A. J., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
and adolescents referred to specialist gender
(2013b). Factors associated with Desistence
services: a systematic review. Archives of
and persistence of childhood gender dysphoria:
Disease in Childhood, Published Online
A quantitative follow-up study. Journal of the
First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
American Academy of Child and Adolescent
archdischild-2023-326681
Psychiatry, 52(6), 582–590. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaac.2013.03.016
Taylor, J., Hall, R., Langton, T., Fraser, L., &
Hewitt, C. E. (2024). Care pathways of children
Strang, J. F., Meagher, H., Kenworthy, L.,
and adolescents referred to specialist gender
de Vries, A. L., Menvielle, E., Leibowitz, S.,
services: a systematic review. Archives of
Janssen, A., Cohen-Kettenis, P., Shumer, D.
Disease in Childhood, Published Online
E., Edwards-Leeper, L., Pleak, R. R., Spack,
First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
N., Karasic, D. H., Schreier, H., Balleur, A.,
archdischild-2023-326760
Tishelman, A., Ehrensaft, D., Rodnan, L.,
Kuschner, E. S., … Anthony, L. G. (2016). Initial Taylor, J., Mitchell, A., Hall, R., Heathcote, C.,
clinical guidelines for co-occurring autism
Langton, T., Fraser, L., & Hewitt, C. E. (2024).
spectrum disorder and gender dysphoria or
Interventions to suppress puberty in adolescents
incongruence in adolescents. Journal of Clinical experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
Child and Adolescent Psychology, 47(1), 105–
a systematic review. Archives of Disease in
115. https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2016.1228 Childhood, Published Online First: April 2024.
462
https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2023-326669
Swaab, D. F., & Garcia-Falgueras, A. (2009).
Sexual differentiation of the human brain
in relation to gender identity and sexual
orientation. Functional neurology, 24(1), 17–28.
Taylor, J., Hall, R., Heathcote, C., Hewitt, C.
E., Langton, T., & Fraser, L. (2024). Clinical

261

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Taylor, J., Mitchell, A., Hall, R., Langton, T.,
Fraser, L., & Hewitt, C. E. (2024). Masculinising
and feminising hormone interventions
for adolescents with gender dysphoria or
incongruence: a systematic review. Archives
of Disease in Childhood, Published Online
First: April 2024. https://doi.org/10.1136/
archdischild-2023-326670
The National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide
and Safety in Mental Health. Annual Report: UK
patient and general population data, 2010-2020.
2023. University of Manchester. https://nspa.org.
uk/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/NCISH-2023report-Bookmarked.pdf
The Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust. (2015). Board papers - June 2015.
Thoughts on Things and Stuff. (2023, March
7). WPATH 2016 - Dr. Polly Carmichael:
The Tavistock GIDS Experience [Video].
YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=8HQBfuV3V98
THRIVE Assessment Tool. (n.d.). Implementing
THRIVE. https://implementingthrive.org/
implemented/toolkit/toolkit-phase-1/thriveassessment/
Tollit, M. A., Pace, C. C., Telfer, M., Hoq, M.,
Bryson, J., Fulkoski, N., Cooper, C., & Pang,
K. C. (2019). What are the health outcomes
of trans and gender diverse young people
in Australia? study protocol for the Trans20
Longitudinal Cohort Study. BMJ Open, 9(11).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032151
Trafford, A. M., Carr, M. J., Ashcroft, D. M.,
Chew-Graham, C. A., Cockcroft, E., Cybulski,
L., Garavini, E., Garg, S., Kabir, T., Kapur, N.,
Temple, R. K., Webb, R. T., & Mok, P. L. (2023).
Temporal trends in eating disorder and selfharm incidence rates among adolescents and
young adults in the UK in the 2 years since
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic: A populationbased study. The Lancet Child & Adolescent

262

Health, 7(8), 544–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s2352-4642(23)00126-8
Twenge, J. M. (2023). Generations: The real
differences between gen Z, millennials, gen X,
boomers, and silents--and what they mean for
America’s future. Atria Books.
Twist, J., & de Graaf, N. M. (2018). Gender
diversity and non-binary presentations in young
people attending the United Kingdom’s National
Gender Identity Development Service. Clinical
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 24(2), 277–
290. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359104518804311
Van Cauwenberg, G., Dhondt, K., & Motmans,
J. (2021). Ten years of experience in counseling
gender diverse youth in Flanders, Belgium.
A clinical overview. International Journal of
Impotence Research, 33(7), 671–678. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41443-021-00441-8
van der Loos, M. A., Hannema, S. E., Klink,
D. T., den Heijer, M., & Wiepjes, C. M. (2022).
Continuation of gender-affirming hormones
in transgender people starting puberty
suppression in adolescence: A cohort study in
the Netherlands. The Lancet Child & Adolescent
Health, 6(12), 869–875. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s2352-4642(22)00254-1
van der Loos, M. A., Klink, D. T., Hannema, S.
E., Bruinsma, S., Steensma, T. D., Kreukels, B.
P., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., de Vries, A. L., den
Heijer, M., & Wiepjes, C. M. (2023). Children
and adolescents in the amsterdam cohort
of gender dysphoria: Trends in diagnosticand treatment trajectories during the first 20
years of the Dutch Protocol. The Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 20(3), 398–409. https://doi.
org/10.1093/jsxmed/qdac029
van der Miesen, A. I. R., Steensma, T. D., de
Vries, A. L. C., Bos, H., & Popma, A. (2020).
Psychological Functioning in Transgender
Adolescents Before and After GenderAffirmative Care Compared With Cisgender

References

General Population Peers. The Journal
of adolescent health: official publication
of the Society for Adolescent Medicine,
66(6), 699–704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2019.12.018
Vandenbussche, E. (2021). Detransition-related
needs and support: A cross-sectional online
survey. Journal of Homosexuality, 69(9), 1602–
1620. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2021.19
19479
Vrouenraets, L. J., Fredriks, A. M., Hannema,
S. E., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., & de Vries, M. C.
(2015). Early Medical Treatment of Children
and Adolescents With Gender Dysphoria:
An Empirical Ethical Study. The Journal
of adolescent health : official publication
of the Society for Adolescent Medicine,
57(4), 367–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2015.04.004
Wallien, M. S., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
(2008). Psychosexual outcome of genderdysphoric children. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
47(12), 1413–1423. https://doi.org/10.1097/
CHI.0b013e31818956b9

World Health Organization: WHO. (2022).
International Classification of Diseases Eleventh
Revision (ICD-11). https://icd.who.int/browse11/
l-m/en
World Health Organization: WHO. (2022b, June
8). Mental disorders. https://www.who.int/newsroom/fact-sheets/detail/mental-disorders
World Professional Association for Transgender
Health. (2012). Standards of Care for the Health
of Transsexual, Transgender, and Gender
Nonconforming People [7th Version]. https://
www.wpath.org/publications/soc
Young Minds. (n.d.). Guide to CAMHS: a guide
for young people. Young Minds. Retrieved April
2, 2024, from https://www.youngminds.org.uk/
young-person/your-guide-to-support/guide-tocamhs/
Zucker, K. J. (1985). Cross-gender-identified
children. Gender Dysphoria, 75–174. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4684-4784-2_4

Warrier, V., Greenberg, D. M., Weir, E.,
Buckingham, C., Smith, P., Lai, M.-C., Allison,
C., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2020). Elevated rates
of autism, other neurodevelopmental and
psychiatric diagnoses, and autistic traits in
transgender and gender-diverse individuals.
Nature Communications, 11(1). https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-020-17794-1
Wiik, A., Lundberg, T. R., Rullman, E.,
Andersson, D. P., Holmberg, M., Mandić, M.,
Brismar, T. B., Dahlqvist Leinhard, O., Chanpen,
S., Flanagan, J. N., Arver, S., & Gustafsson, T.
(2019). Muscle strength, size, and composition
following 12 months of gender-affirming
treatment in transgender individuals. The
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism,
105(3). https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgz247
263

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 1
Terms of reference

Appendix 1: Terms of reference

Terms of reference for the review of gender
identity development services for children
and adolescents

Introduction
1. NHS England is the responsible
commissioner for specialised gender identity
services for children and adolescents. The
Gender Identity Development Service for
children and adolescents is currently managed
by the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust.

2. In recent years there has been a significant
increase in the number of referrals to the
Gender Identity Development Service,
and this has occurred at a time when the
service has moved from a psychosocial and
psychotherapeutic model to one that also
prescribes medical interventions by way
of hormone drugs. This has contributed to
growing interest in how the NHS should most
appropriately assess, diagnose and care for
children and young people who present with
gender incongruence and gender identity
issues.
3. It is in this context that NHS England and
NHS Improvement’s Quality and Innovation
Committee has asked Dr Hilary Cass to
chair an independent review, and to make
recommendations on how to improve services
for children and young people experiencing
issues with their gender identity or gender
incongruence, and ensure that the best
model/s for safe and effective services are
commissioned. .

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Review Scope
The independent review, led by Dr Cass, will
be wide ranging in scope and will conduct
extensive engagement with all interested
stakeholders. The review is expected to set out
findings and make recommendations in relation
to:
i.

ii.

Pathways of care into local services,
including clinical management
approaches for individuals with less
complex expressions of gender
incongruence who do not need specialist
gender identity services;
Pathways of care into specialist gender
identity services, including referral criteria
into a specialist gender identity service;
and referral criteria into other appropriate
specialist services;

iii. Clinical models and clinical management
approaches at each point of the
specialised pathway of care from
assessment to discharge, including
a description of objectives, expected
benefits and expected outcomes for each
clinical intervention in the pathway;
iv. Best clinical approach for individuals with
other complex presentations;
v.

The use of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogues and gender affirming
drugs, supported by a review of the
available evidence by the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence;
any treatment recommendations will
include a description of treatment
objectives, expected benefits and
expected outcomes, and potential risks,
harms and effects to the individual;

vi. Ongoing clinical audit, long term followup, data reporting and future research
priorities;

vii. Current and future workforce
requirements;
viii. Exploration of the reasons for the
increase in referrals and why the increase
has disproportionately been of natal
females, and the implications of these
matters; and,
ix. Any other relevant matters that arise
during the course of the review.
4. In addition, and with support from the
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
and other relevant professional associations,
the Chair will review current clinical practice
concerning individuals referred to the specialist
endocrine service. It is expected that findings
and any recommendations on this aspect of the
review will be reported early in 2021 with the
review’s wider findings and recommendations
delivered later in 2021.
5. The review will not immediately consider
issues around informed consent as these
are the subject of an ongoing judicial review.
However, any implications that might arise from
the legal ruling could be considered by the
review if appropriate or necessary.

Appendix 1: Terms of reference

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 2

The epidemiology, care pathways, outcomes, and
experiences of children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence: a
series of linked systematic reviews and an
international survey

The epidemiology, care pathways, outcomes, and experiences of children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence: a series of linked systematic reviews and an
international survey.
Introduction
Increasing numbers of children and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence are
being referred for care at specialist paediatric gender services. There are several clinical guidelines to
support the clinical care of children and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence
and their families, however, there are divergent clinical approaches to the management of these
children and adolescents. Several countries have or are modifying referral and care pathways and
provision in response to increasing numbers of referrals, changing demographics and ongoing
uncertainty about the benefits, risks, and long-term effects of medical interventions for these
children.
Overall aim: To systematically identify, collate and synthesise the existing evidence on the
epidemiology, care pathways, outcomes and experiences for children and adolescents with gender
dysphoria/incongruence.
We answered the following questions in the linked series of systematic reviews:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

What are the number of referrals and the characteristics of children and/or adolescents
referred to specialist gender identity or endocrinology services that provide healthcare for
those experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence, and have these changed over time?
What are the range of care pathways for children and/or adolescents referred to specialist
paediatric gender or endocrinology services?
What is the impact of social transition in relation to gender for children and/or adolescents?
What is the effectiveness of psychosocial support interventions for children and/or
adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence?
What is the gender-related, psychosocial, physiological, or cognitive outcomes of puberty
suppression in adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence?
What is the gender-related, psychosocial, physiological, or cognitive outcomes of
feminising/masculinising hormones in adolescents experiencing gender
dysphoria/incongruence?
What does published guidance on recommendations regarding the care of children and
adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria/incongruence include, how were they developed
and what is the quality?

The aim for the international survey was to understand the current provision of gender services for
children and adolescents across the EU-15+ countries which have comparable high-income
healthcare systems, to inform service development in the UK.
Systematic Review Methods
The protocol was registered on PROSPERO (CRD42021289659).

2

Search strategy
A single search strategy was used to identify studies comprising two combined concepts: ‘children’,
which included all terms for children and adolescents; and ‘gender dysphoria’, which included
associated terms such as gender incongruence and gender-related distress, and gender identity
terms including transgender, gender diverse and non-binary. MEDLINE, EMBASE and PsycINFO
through OVID, CINAHL Complete through EBSCO, and Web of Science (Social Science Citation Index)
were searched (May 2021 updated in April 2022). Reference lists of included studies and relevant
systematic reviews were also checked.
Overarching inclusion and exclusion criteria
Each individual review had its own inclusion and exclusion criteria, but studies were first screened
against the following broad criteria:
Inclusion Criteria:
• Studies including children <18 years with gender incongruence, gender dysphoria / genderrelated distress or referral to a paediatric or adolescent gender identity service.
• Primary studies (including those that involve secondary analysis of previously collected data)
of any design, including experimental studies, observational studies, surveys, consensus
studies and qualitative studies.
Exclusion Criteria:
• Studies about gender incongruence or gender dysphoria in adulthood.
• Studies of mixed populations unless the results for those with childhood gender
incongruence, gender-related distress/dysphoria or those referred to a gender identity
service in childhood are presented separately.
• Studies about individuals with differences in sex development (DSD)/ variations in sex
characteristics (VSC).
• Single case studies, case series, editorials, or opinion pieces.
• Student dissertations.
• Systematic reviews or other literature reviews.
• Studies reported in conference abstracts.
• Studies not reported in English language.
Selection process
Search results were uploaded to Covidence and screened independently by two reviewers. Full texts
for potentially relevant articles were retrieved and reviewed against the inclusion criteria for each
review by two reviewers independently. Disagreements were resolved through discussion and
involvement of a third reviewer where required.
Risk of Bias (quality) assessment
Where appropriate, the quality of studies included in the individual reviews were appraised using the
most appropriate method. The tools used included the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT),
modified versions of the Newcastle Ottawa Scale, and the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II instrument. Two researchers rated the studies independently with discussion

3

to reach consensus. Study quality was not formally assessed in the systematic review that examined
the characteristics of children and adolescents referred to paediatric gender services or in the review
that examined their care pathways.
Data synthesis
A narrative approach to syntheses was used across reviews. The syntheses were performed by one
reviewer and second-checked by another. Depending upon the specific review, proportions were
combined in a random-effects meta-analysis using metaprop (Stata v18) with variances stabilised
using the Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation. Graphs were used to display data visually
where appropriate.
International Survey Methods
This was an e-survey of gender services for children and adolescents in the EU15+ countries which
was open between September 2022 and April 2023. Contact details for the services were obtained
from publicly available data, expert contacts and via snowball sampling. An email was sent to
identified clinicians or managers, explaining the survey aims, confidentiality and data protection, and
expected completion time. One reminder email was sent after three weeks. The survey contained 34
questions on service structure, care pathways, interventions, and data collection and an additional
four questions on staffing and waiting lists. The questions were informed by a review of published
papers describing service provision and the content of clinical guidelines. All responses were
downloaded into Excel, descriptively analysed, and compared to assess similarity and variation
among the services.

Results
Our searches yielded 28,147 records, 3,181 of which were identified as potentially relevant for the
linked series of systematic reviews. Across all the reviews, 237 papers (214 studies and 23
guidelines/position statements) including 113,269 children and/or adolescents from 18 countries
were reviewed (Figure 1). Included studies were published between 1978 and 2022, with 162 (68%)
published from 2017 to the end date of the search in 2022.

4

Figure 1: Overview of studies included in the individual reviews.

Overview of the findings
There has been a two to three-fold increase in the number of referrals and an increase in the ratio of
birth-registered females to males being referred to specialist paediatric gender services over time
across countries. Very few studies report data on gender status (self-reported gender identity, gender
dysphoria, age at onset, and social transition) but from the limited data reported, over 60% of those
referred were described as having taken steps towards a social transition. The evidence base for
outcomes (benefits or harms) of social transition in childhood and adolescence is both limited and of
low quality.
Data published to date suggests that presence of mental health challenges such as depression,
anxiety, suicidality, self-harm, and eating disorders may be higher in children and adolescents
referred to gender services than population estimates. There is limited data reported for other cooccurring mental health conditions. Presence of autism spectrum condition (ASC) and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be higher in those referred to gender services than
population estimates. It was not possible to make inferences about changes over time for the
characteristics explored due to overlapping samples and data being reported over large time-periods
in individual studies.
There is very little information about detail or type of psychological care received by children and/or
adolescents under the care of a specialist gender service, and there is limited low quality evidence
on the outcomes of psychosocial interventions for children and adolescents with gender dysphoria or
incongruence. Most analyses of mental health, psychological and/or psychosocial outcomes showed
either benefit or no change, with none indicating negative or adverse effects. Only three studies
assessed interventions that were specifically designed for children and/or adolescents experiencing
gender incongruence, but these interventions varied considerably in content and delivery.
Data published to date suggests that approximately two-thirds of adolescents referred to specialist
gender services receive puberty suppression or hormones, although rates for each vary considerably
across clinics. There is also variation in the rates of those receiving puberty suppression prior to

5

starting hormones compared to those receiving hormones alone. There is very little information
about children/adolescents who do not complete the assessment process within a specialist gender
clinic or who do not receive medical intervention. Studies consistently report small proportions of
adolescents who discontinue medical treatment; however, systematic reporting and reasons for
discontinuation are rarely provided and follow up periods are limited.
There were no high-quality studies identified that used an appropriate study design to assess the
outcomes of puberty suppression in adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence.
There is insufficient and/or inconsistent evidence about the effects of puberty suppression on gender
dysphoria, mental and psychosocial health, cognitive development, cardio-metabolic risk, and
fertility. There is consistent moderate-quality evidence, albeit from mainly pre-post studies, that
bone density and height may be compromised during treatment.
There is a lack of high-quality research assessing the outcomes of hormones for masculinisation or
feminisation in adolescents with gender dysphoria or incongruence and few studies that undertake
long-term follow-up. There is little evidence regarding gender dysphoria, body satisfaction,
psychosocial and cognitive outcomes, and fertility. There is moderate-quality evidence from mainly
pre-post studies that hormone treatment may in the short-term improve some aspects of
psychological health. There is inconsistent evidence about the effect of hormones on height/growth,
bone health and cardiometabolic effects.
Twenty-three guidelines or position statements were identified that contain recommendations about
the management of children and/or adolescents with gender dysphoria or incongruence. Few
guidelines are informed by a systematic review of empirical evidence and there is a lack of
transparency about how recommendations were developed. Only two of them consulted directly
with children and/or adolescents during their development. Most national and regional guidelines
have been influenced by the World Professional Association for Transgender Health and Endocrine
Society guidelines which themselves lack developmental rigour and are linked through cosponsorship. There is consensus across guidelines that those requiring specialist gender care should
receive a multi-disciplinary assessment, although there is a lack of clarity about who should be
involved in this and any differences in assessment for children and adolescents. Similarly, there is
consensus that children and adolescents should be offered psychosocial support, but there is limited
guidance about the process or approach for this and different recommendations about whether
specialist gender clinics or mental health services should provide this. There are differing
recommendations about when and on what basis psychological and hormone interventions should
be offered, and limited guidance about pre-pubertal children or those with a non-binary gender
identity.
The international survey found similar results with areas of common practice across gender services
for children and adolescents in eight countries, with most using DSM-V diagnostic criteria and a
multidisciplinary team approach. The survey revealed key differences in the composition of teams,
the management of co-occurring conditions, pre-pubertal children, and those with a non-binary
gender identity, and in the criteria for accessing medical interventions. Referral pathways into
gender services for children and adolescents varied, and services reported limited provision of
psychological care and a reliance on local mental health services. The survey found a lack of routine

6

outcome data collection among clinics, and this was evident from the studies included across the
systematic reviews.
How the results might affect research, policy, or practice
Services need to respond to the potentially co-occurring complexities of children and adolescents
being referred into specialist gender and endocrine services. Information about provision of
psychological care and consideration of how this should be delivered is urgently needed considering
the higher prevalence of mental health and psychosocial difficulties in this population. Detailed
guidance to support psychological care of children and adolescents experiencing gender
incongruence/dysphoria, or gender diverse children with psychosocial or mental health difficulties is
needed. A better understanding of the care needs and provision for children and adolescents who
enter assessment in a gender service but do not go on to receive medical interventions is needed to
inform service provision. Prospective studies that follow-up children into adulthood and report
information about the range of pathways followed are needed to understand longer term outcomes
for those referred to specialist paediatric gender services. There is a lack of evidence and guidelines
for those children and/or adolescents identifying as non-binary.
Healthcare services and professionals should take into account the variable quality of published
guidelines to support the management of children and young people experiencing gender dysphoria
or incongruence. The lack of independence in many national and regional guidelines, and the limited
evidence-based underpinning current guidelines, should be considered when utilising these for
practice. Practice base guidelines should reflect the limited evidence of the outcome of social
transition for children and adolescents. Services and professionals should communicate the
limitations of the evidence base surrounding social transition to children and adolescents
experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence and parents/carers.
There is a lack of high-quality evidence to support recommendations for puberty suppression or
hormones for masculinisation or feminisation in children/adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria
or incongruence. There is a lack of evidence comparing outcomes of adolescents who receive
puberty suppression followed by hormones for masculinisation or feminisation to those who receive
hormones only. Future guidelines should report the methods of development in full, with greater
transparency about the links between evidence and recommendations and how recommendations
are made in the absence of evidence.
Robust research is needed to address the significant gaps in our understanding of the potential shortand long-term outcomes of social transition, the risks, and benefits of puberty suppression and
hormone interventions, and the appropriateness and effectiveness of different psychosocial
interventions. Identification and agreement of core outcomes would help to ensure that what is
important to relevant stakeholders is being collected and this would support future aggregation of
evidence. High-quality studies using an appropriate study design are needed as is robust reporting.
High quality standardised data collection should be routinely undertaken in gender clinics to enable
comparison in outcomes for children and adolescents accessing different services.
Strengths and limitations

7

Strengths include a published protocol with robust search strategies and comprehensive synthesis. A
limitation is that the database searches were conducted up until April 2022 and as this is a rapidly
evolving area more recent publications would not have been included in the syntheses. We
attempted to draw the findings of papers published after April 2022 into the discussion of each
review, however as a comprehensive search of this literature was not undertaken more recent
publications may have been missed. Due to available resources, only studies published in English
were included. The primary research included in the reviews were generally of low quality and there
was often inadequate reporting of key information required for the reviews which limited the
analyses and conclusions that could be reached. All data relevant to review questions presented
within the studies were extracted, summarised, and synthesised.
Caution should be taken when interpreting any of the pooled estimates as they represent data for a
wide period of time, reported data were averaged over a large number of years, studies included
often overlapping samples from the same clinic, and there were often discrepancies in the individual
studies between the referred numbers and those included in the summaries of characteristics, and
inadequate and/or unclear reporting of follow-up. Additionally, different tools or instruments were
used to measure outcomes which increased heterogeneity. Reliance on publicly available information
and known experts may mean some clinics were not identified and contacted to take part in the
international survey. The low response rate within the survey means that certain countries are not
represented and other potential differences in gender services are still unknown.
Journal publications
There are nine journal articles published in the Archives of Disease in Childhood associated with this
overarching summary:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Impact of social transition in relation to gender for children and adolescents: a systematic review.
Gender services for children and adolescents across the EU-15+ countries: an online survey.
Psychosocial support interventions for children and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or
incongruence: a systematic review.
Clinical guidelines for children and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence: a
systematic review of guideline quality (part 1).
Clinical guidelines for children and adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence: a
systematic review of recommendations (part 2).
Interventions to suppress puberty in adolescents experiencing gender dysphoria or incongruence:
a systematic review.
Masculinising and feminising hormone interventions for adolescents experiencing gender
dysphoria or incongruence: a systematic review.
Characteristics of children and adolescents referred to specialist gender services: a systematic
review.
Care pathways of children and adolescents referred to specialist gender services: a systematic
review.

8

9

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 3

Qualitative Research Summary
Narrative accounts of gender
questioning

Introduction
In 2020 NHS England appointed Dr Hilary Cass to review gender identity services for
children and young people in England. Dr Cass - through NHS England - commissioned
independent qualitative research from the University of York to understand:
•

children and young people’s experiences of gender dysphoria, and the support they
found helpful;

•

parents’ experiences of supporting their child;

•

families’ experiences of accessing services, including how they make decisions about
care;

•

experiences of young adults who questioned their gender when younger; and

•

the experiences of care professionals who support children and young people,
referred to the Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS).

We spoke to young people, aged between 12 and 18 years old (n=14), who sought
support from the specialist NHS gender services in England. We also talked to parents
(n=12), young adults aged between 19 and 30 years old (n=18) and care professionals
(n=23). The research, conducted between March 2022 and August 2023, received NHS
ethical approval (IRAS Project Id: 306023). The research protocol is available on the
Cass Review website. This short summary introduces what our participants told us. We
are currently preparing peer review publications on the basis of further, in-depth
analysis. Thank you to everyone, who generously shared their experiences with us.

Doing the research
There is a human imperative to tell our stories and we wished to make use of this,
especially as gender identity is a sensitive (and contested) topic, in which public debate
can be unsympathetic to diverse experiences. We used narrative interviews, to hear
participants’ voices and engage with their biographical experiences. We explored how
they defined, articulated and negotiated their gender, within the context of social
networks.
To ensure we captured diversity, our sampling strategy used different ways of recruiting
participants. We recruited 12 young people via the Gender Identity Development
Service (GIDS) and two through voluntary organisations. We asked these young people
for consent, before inviting their parents to take part. We also recruited three parents,

1

not related to the young people we spoke to, through private practice and voluntary
organisations. Our sample of parents included seven mothers and five fathers.
When recruiting young adults, we contacted six community and voluntary organisations
who, in addition to engaging with valuable discussions about the research, circulated
invitations to take part in it. We also recruited young adults through an Adult Gender
Identity Clinic and interviewed a small number, who had contacted the Cass Review
team, asking to take part in the research.
Most care professionals interviewed worked at GIDS. They represented all regional
teams; had a variety of different backgrounds (i.e., clinical psychologists, psychological
and family therapists, social workers and specialist nurses); varied in the time spent
working in the service; and included those with managerial responsibilities. In addition,
we interviewed a youth worker and a therapist working in private practice.
When inviting participants to take part in our research, we made no assumptions about
how they identify. Our sample of young people included nine young people registered
female at birth and five registered as male. Four had begun a medical pathway. Three
young people were neurodiverse. Most young people described themselves as trans,
although one described themselves as non-binary and several continued to explore
labels.

Our sample of young adults included eight trans men and four trans

women. Four young adults identified as non-binary or gender queer, or for whom labels
were not important. Two participants identified as detransitioners. Five young adults
were neurodiverse. Three belonged to an ethnic minority.
During our interviews we covered similar topics, to ensure we could compare responses,
while creating an environment that enabled participants to reflect on their specific
experiences. Topics were developed from relevant literature and through discussions
with young gender diverse people as part of our Patient and Public Involvement (PPI)
work. These young people also commented on the make-up of the sample and the
focus of the study.
Interviews, held online using video conferencing software, lasted between sixty and
ninety minutes. With consent, we audio recorded interviews and transcribed them
verbatim. We interviewed most participants once but adjusted our approach to support
their needs. Those with autistic spectrum conditions, for example, were able to meet
with a researcher for shorter periods over several interviews.
2

Analysis explored the ways in which participants negotiated meaning, within normative
expressions of gender identity. This generated narrative themes that enabled us to
relate personal and cultural stories to their social context. These themes were then
interrogated to highlight similarities and differences among participants.
Doing research on gender identity generates challenges. Some people, for example,
expressed a reluctance to take part in research, because of what they regarded as
hostile public discussions. We are sorry to miss their voices but understand their
concerns. Our voluntary sector colleagues spoke of research fatigue, while the use of
GIDS’ clinicians to generate our sample of young people may have meant the research
did not capture more complex cases. Despite this, our research represents a diverse
range of experiences, pathways and outcomes, which provide valuable insights for those
planning services.

What we found
Young people
Many young people described an initial sense of difference, which was difficult to
explain. They did not fit in and gender norms confused them. Social interactions
became fraught with uncertainty and anxiety:
“I had people telling me constantly, like, why are you acting like this, you’re a
girl not a boy. Like, I would just be thinking to myself like why are people trying
to make me a girl when I’m genuinely not a girl? So yes, that was probably the
most confusing time of my life”.
Young people explained that they were sometimes made to feel like “freaks” or
“outcasts”. Many described experiences of bullying. The negative reactions of others
caused distress.
They - and their families - initially sought support from primary care and mental health
services. Discussing gender in these settings was not always positive. Young people
and their parents described a lack of knowledge and understanding. Some also spoke
of not being taken seriously:
“At first, [with a GP] it was not good. He literally had no idea what we were
talking about, which was frustrating.”
Young people wanted support to help manage potential distress and explore what
gender questioning meant for them and their body. Most young people, however,
3

experienced a long wait before accessing NHS gender services (around three
years).

Waiting times impact on young people and their families, and the work

specialist services provide.

Care professionals believe waiting lists represent the

biggest

challenge

service

agree.

Families describe the difficulties of understanding gender questioning and

facing

delivery.

Young

people

and

their

parents

managing distress, without formal support. Young people (and their parents) wished
professional support was available during the initial stages of gender questioning:
“Hearing nothing […] was definitely a struggle [...] So maybe like in those waiting
times [services should] try providing a bit of support, whether it’s just even online
or something because you’re kind of completely left in the dark and that’s quite
scary.”
Accessing reliable information, a young person could trust and find useful proved
challenging for many. While some did find online content helpful, it was described by
many as a “minefield”. Many expressed a need for balanced and informative online
material.
Young people said the lack of support, when waiting, affected their mental health and
well-being. They spent the time reflecting and researching. They also took steps to
help manage how they felt and most socially transitioned while waiting. The process,
although dynamic and flexible, was positively regarded by young people. Many parents,
although initially hesitant, come to understand the value of social transitioning. A few,
however, remained anxious about its impact. Families would have welcomed advice on
how to negotiate social transitioning but many experienced difficulties in accessing
support.
Several young people, while waiting, become aware of the ways in which medical
pathways could help them. Waiting, they said, provided them with plenty of opportunity
to understand how they felt. Many were confident about the next steps, when first
accessing NHS gender services.

Some young people regard their parents as more

cautious. This could be a cause of tension.
Many of the young people we spoke to, however, had not accessed medical
pathways. Most were in various stages of assessment, while others were waiting for
referral to adult services. The few who had accessed medical pathways described them
as having a positive impact.
4

Young people expressed a range of thoughts and feelings about beginning sessions at
GIDS. When accessing specialist services, they learn that “a lot of talking” must be
done:
“At first, it [talking] didn’t feel helpful. I didn’t really know why […] because they
can’t really give you a quick-fix […] I feel like when you’re a kid, you just want
everything to be fixed, and my mum is the same […] so, that was frustrating, but
I’ve, kind of, come to terms with the fact that it’s a slow, kind of, like, therapy
process, and it’s not all about just medication and stuff like that."

Young people respond in different ways, although their hopes remain consistent. They
want to feel better about themselves. Some young people looked forward to talking
with someone who understood them. Some, however, felt uncomfortable and initially
found it difficult to talk about how they felt.

Others expressed frustration,

disappointment and at times, anger. They believed talking slowed down or prevented
access to medical pathways. These young people believed their life was “on hold” and
described how they felt unable to plan for the future. Waiting had created a sense of
urgency:
“I expected to do the talking first but I didn’t think it’d take long […] [that] they’d
want to get me on puberty blockers as soon as possible […] it was just really
frustrating because obviously there was nothing I could do about it. Like, it’s my
body but I have no control over it.”
Irrespective of expectations (and any initial frustration or hostility), many young people
come to appreciate the opportunity to talk with specialist clinicians. Young people felt
listened to and believed. Relationships with clinicians, although not without tension,
come to be highly valued.

Young people described having access to a relaxed,

comfortable and non-threatening, safe space in which they could explore how they feel,
as empowering:
“They give you a safe place to talk as personal as you want and it doesn’t go
anywhere, you can trust them, and you feel validated and like what you’re saying
really matters.”
Young people remain sensitive to any questioning of who they are. They may, however,
become open to talking, when exploring what their gender questioning means for
them. Talking, for example, enables them to relieve distress, consider different options
5

and plan for the future. For young people, successful clinical relationships establish
respect, build trust and encourage an openness, when exploring experiences. Young
people believe they have a right to be flexible, as they search for an identity, with which
they feel comfortable.

Parents
The parents we spoke to represent a diverse range of responses. They support their
child in a variety of ways. Parents conduct their own research before seeking support
and guidance. They value and prioritise different pathways. Each without doubt, and
even when in discord with their child (or with services), acted in what they understood
to be the best interests of their child. Maintaining supportive family relationships
remained a priority for them.

Young people, although mentioning parents’ initial

confusion and a lack of understanding, felt “lucky” to have such caring parents, even if
they do not always agree with them.
Some parents, clear about the next steps, support their child by advocating for access
to medical pathways.

They express concerns that specialists services are not

sufficiently “affirmative” and may act as an inappropriate gatekeeper to medical
pathways:
“[They] felt like the gatekeeper to the endocrinology service [...], so we knew
that we had to jump through that hoop [assessment] but in terms of therapeutic
support, that’s not to say that the therapists weren’t skilled because I’ve got
immense amount of respect for [name of clinician] but I think it was just, it’s
flawed, isn’t it, it’s an immensely flawed service.”
Other parents enter specialist services feeling less certain about what should happen
next. These parents wanted help supporting their child, which they hoped would include
exploring different options and outcomes. They wanted reliable information and a
comprehensive assessment process:
“I was quite relieved when the counselling with GIDS went on [for] a long time
[...] because that just slowed it all down a bit. I think [name of child] wanted to
rush, rush, rush, get the diagnosis, get his testosterone, get his top surgery done
and then his life would be brilliant again […]. Whereas [...] I wanted it to slow
right down and take that time talking, for GIDS to make a proper assessment

6

and yes, and for me to be able to trust their assessment, [...] which I felt I did
at the end of it.”
Most parents remain cautious, but open-minded about medical pathways.

A few,

however, avoided or delayed a referral to GIDS because of worries about an
“affirmative” approach, which they believed would rush or prioritise medical pathways.
Parents expressed continuing uncertainties and doubts about what was best for their
child. They worry about getting it “wrong”. They also worry about the extent services
could understand their child and respond appropriately. Some parents explained that
healthcare practitioners had raised safeguarding concerns.

This included parents

advocating for medical pathways and those who adopted a more cautious approach.
Many parents expressed anxieties about the future, including the extent their child
would be accepted by a society they regarded as hostile to difference. The long-term
consequences of medical interventions also concerned some parents. Parents want
their child to be happy but are not always sure how best to achieve this.
Several parents express worries about the extent services can meet holistic
needs. Some worry, for example, that mental health and neurodiversity would not be
appropriately considered, when exploring their child’s gender questioning and any
associated distress. Parents of children with autistic spectrum conditions describe
positive experiences of specialist support, especially when they help establish networks
of support, although some remain unsure if clinicians had the skills or experience to
understand and support their child.
Parents’ narratives understandably focused on their child’s needs. Irrespective of their
expectations and hopes for their child, parents found care difficult to negotiate:
“I think that’s part of the problem with this, because the system would like there
to be a clear problem to solve and a clear route in which to solve it and I’m afraid
it just isn’t the case.”
They also found caring emotionally challenging and there are times when they feel
overwhelmed:
“I think [we] just need us to swallow our own discomfort and stuff about it, and
sit with theirs [their child], and not judge, and not, not tell them how to be or
what to do, to just, to standstill with it. And that’s really hard for some people I
think because it is mind blowing stuff if you let yourself dwell on it.”
7

Some explained that their own mental and physical health had deteriorated because of
their caring responsibilities. They rarely received support for this.

Healthcare professionals and clinicians
Clinicians said negotiating assessment (including making decisions about the readiness
for medical pathways), while also providing therapeutic support is a defining feature of
their role. It was a source of tension too. They explained that before making any
assessment, they encouraged the young person to reflect on - and understand - what
their gender questioning meant for them. Clinicians worry that current changes, which
involve considerable documenting of decision making, reduce the time available for
talking to young people and their families.
Clinicians said that increased waiting times meant some young people and their parents
come with “fixed” ideas about what they need from specialist provision. This sometimes
made it difficult to build positive relationships, at least initially. Working with families,
who felt confident in their decision making and wished to move forward quickly, created
particular challenges.

Clinicians understood that some families regarded them as

“gatekeepers” to medical pathways. They believe this can be unhelpful as it could
undermine therapeutic intent. Clinicians spent time in initial appointments apologising
for the long wait and setting expectations. This may require them to “unpick” what had
gone on before. Some families did not like this and it undermined trust.
Clinicians found current clinical language unhelpful. Labels such as “affirmative” or
“exploratory”, they said, did not reflect the complex and thoughtful work they
did. Clinicians felt it possible to “validate” a young person’s experience, while seeking
to “open up a curiosity” about what this may mean for them. In explaining this, some
clinicians said their role was not to make decisions for - or change the mind of - a young
person but rather to encourage self-reflection on what would help them to flourish:
"I think it is really [...] taking a holistic look at the young people that come
through the door and a very person-centred approach. I wouldn’t claim that any
young person that comes through the door would need the same thing as the
person who came to the door the hour previous. So really taking that personcentred approach. Looking at what they need to live well, I suppose that’s what
I see my job as, what does this person need to live well, to be happy, to flourish
in the world."
8

Clinicians say they are “not invested in particular outcomes”, when supporting young
people. Their role may include facilitating access to medical and/or social pathways,
alongside considering other possible outcomes. Successful therapeutic relationships,
they say, require carefully listening to what the young person is saying, although this
does not preclude a “gentle” questioning of what is said. Clinicians said enabling a
young person to articulate an outcome and/or pathway appropriate to their needs,
remained their priority:
“I suppose I see the main purpose of the job as being to develop kind of trusting
therapeutic relationships with young people and their families that enable young
people to be able to feel safe to explore their experiences [...] thinking about how
we can best support people, and that might include physical interventions, it
might involve talking, it might involve both, but I think all of that can only really
happen if clinicians kind of provide that really like safe listening space.”
Some clinicians highlighted the challenges of working with clinical uncertainty and an
evidence base that was not as strong as they would have liked, although a few noted
that this was not unique to their specialism. More experienced clinicians were better
able to negotiate these challenges. Clinicians agreed that puberty blockers and cross
sex hormones provide an important pathway, alongside therapeutic support. Ensuring
their safe use was important, in addition to understanding their long-term
consequences.
Clinicians remarked that there is no agreed fixed point of reference on which to judge
the success of an intervention, let alone a societal consensus on the appropriate
response

to

young people

who

are

gender

questioning

and/or

experiencing

distress. Responding to changing social and cultural expectations, political interference
and regulatory scrutiny, they said, made for a difficult working environment. Clinicians,
however, commented on “respecting the anxiety” generated by their role. They agreed,
it is a privilege to work with young people. Their work is challenging. They believe it
should be. It was also hugely rewarding.
The value of dysphoria as a diagnostic category provides an example of the challenges
clinicians face. For many young people - and young adults - dysphoria is a useful
medical label, helping to legitimise and explain experience. It also helped justify asking
for support. Young people believed it created – at least initially - a possible shared
language, which others could understand.

Over time, however, some expressed
9

ambivalence. They continued to understand the value of dysphoria, but thought it could
also represent an unhelpful diagnosis, in which their social experience could only be
regarded as authentic if a medical label were attached. Young adults are especially
sensitive to this. Parents commented on how a diagnosis of dysphoria helped legitimate
their child’s experiences, while facilitating access to medical pathways. It also helped
them make sense of what they were going through, by making it “real”. Clinicians
understand the importance of diagnosis, particularly when justifying decision making,
but remained sensitive to over-medicalisation, especially when a person’s dysphoria
was socially located.

Young adults
The young adults we spoke to described similar experiences to young people, when
managing their distress and like young people, they struggled to access appropriate
support. Young adults also spoke of supportive family relationships, although these are
not without tension. Several who had initially experienced their parents’ questioning as
unhelpful, came to recognise its value in enabling them to understand their feelings. A
few young adults, however, described less positive relationships, which had deteriorated
over time, with both immediate and extended family. This increased their risk of social
isolation.
Young adults expressed an incredibly diverse range of experiences and pathways. Many
benefitted from access to medical pathways which, they said, enabled them to lead the
lives they wanted.

Others explored equally empowering options, such as social

transitioning and more fluid and non-binary expressions of gender. Some young adults,
as they grew older, questioned binary approaches, although for others, gender binaries
remain an important reference point. Like young people, young adults highlighted the
importance of having access to balanced information that reflected a diverse range of
experiences and pathways, from a trusted source, such as the NHS.
Young adults explained how the discovery of gender diversity - and the possibility of
transition - generated self-understanding. This included knowledge about the diversity
and richness of transition. For many, understanding and expressing their gender
occurred gradually and evolved over time:
“But actually I’ve learnt that you grow into it and you start to understand yourself
more and you begin to love yourself because of it.”
10

Many young adults found transitioning liberating and a source of euphoria. These young
adults are proud of their journeys, which they say, have brought them fulfilment, joy
and happiness:
“I started going, oh so what does your euphoria actually want? What are the
things that make you happy? And exploring my gender in that way has been just
such a joy.”
For some, initial gender questioning created a sense of urgency, much of which focused
on accessing medical pathways. These young adults acknowledged that their original
response was to “fix” the problem. This became less important to them as they grew
older. Some explained that discovering different ways to express gender identity was
one of the most important things they had learned. They wished this had been
explained to them when younger but remain uncertain about the extent they would
have listened to such advice.
Young adults believe opening up a space for - and acceptance of - a diversity of
‘transition’ that does not require them to prove they are “trans enough”, is the basis for
the successful exploration of gender identity. What young adults dislike is when others
try to define - or make assumptions about - who they are. They also dislike the
imposition of labels. Young adults are clear. Their gender questioning is not a lifestyle
choice or preference. It is who they are.
Two young adults, however, experienced regret. Physical transition had initially helped
them. They now felt it was a mistake. Looking back, they would have liked more
therapeutic support when considering transition (which they had done outside the
NHS). They also described a lack of support available to those who wish to detransition:
“I felt like it wasn’t, you know, acceptable to go back. It wasn’t a thing to go
back, you know. It wasn’t something that was talked about. It didn’t feel like an
option that they wanted to discuss or even mention […] I want detransition to be
something that can be openly talked about, and regret to be openly talked about.”
Many young adults, when reflecting on their own experiences of transition, explain that
while it can be difficult and uncomfortable, it is important for young people to take their
time, ask for support when needed and make decisions that are right for them:
“Go slow, go calm, just don’t rush it. Go at your own pace.”
Care, they say, must be timely and validating. Young adults, however, spoke of the
difficulties of accessing appropriate care at the time, when you realise you need it.
11

Young adults (and clinicians) emphasise that diversity should not be used to undermine
trans and gender diverse people or the options available to them. Recognising diversity
also requires providing access to support for people who may experience regret.
Internalised and socially realised transphobia, homophobia and misogyny especially
concerned young adults. Young adults feel endlessly judged and held accountable for
their difference and believe this closes down discussion and makes it more difficult for
a person to take the path that is right for them. Young adults believe a person’s capacity
to flourish is strongly influenced by the circumstances in which they live. Services
should seek to understand and support this:
I would tell [services] to [...] make it more of a personalised process [that] is
really important because not everybody, kind of, falls under this neat little
umbrella […] much like gender - it’s not confined to little boxes - the service
cannot be confined to little boxes because it will then exclude so many more
people.”
Young adults’ experiences suggest that one outcome or pathway should not be
prioritised over another. All, they believe, are equally valid. Services should offer
opportunities to understand different pathways, consistent with the breadth of
experience associated with gender questioning. This, they say, is the basis for the
successful exploration of identity. Young adults highlight the need for services to
sensitively support young people, reduce distress and help them live well.

They

recognise the value of open and honest discussions as long as it is done respectfully, in
a trusting encounter, in which rapport has been established:
“It was very in-depth, about every aspect of my life [talking therapy]. In a way,
it was good because I’d never really had the chance to talk [...] in-depth about
what was going on and piece together why I was feeling the way that I was. Yes.
It was difficult, at times, I suppose but I’m glad I had to go through it and I’m
glad that they [clinicians] were thorough enough to make sure that transitioning
was the right thing for me, at that time.”

Concluding thoughts
The needs of those who question their gender identity are not that different from anyone
seeking support from healthcare services. They require timely access to appropriate
care, consistent with their preferences, in which they are able to make informed choices

12

about their future. This includes safe and effective treatments, alongside respectful
therapeutic support, sensitive to the challenges they face.
Our participants’ narratives present rich and varied experiences, although one
consistent theme, emerging throughout their accounts, regarded the importance of
individual and personalised care.

Gender questioning requires an open-minded

approach, in which no outcome is presumed or predetermined and where an individual
is given space (and time) to reflect on - and understand - what questioning means for
them and their bodies. There remains no agreed approach to medical or social
transitioning among young people, their parents or young adults. This is perhaps not
surprising, given the considerable diversity in how individuals make sense of - and
express

-

their

experiences.

The

range

of

possible

outcomes

is

similarly

diverse. Services are required to respond to this diversity, while respecting the voices
of young people. This requires thoughtful and supportive discussions. Those we spoke
express a range of hopes, priorities and expectations. This requires transparency when
clinicians offer and negotiate support.
Accessing timely support, however, creates considerable challenges for young people,
their families and young adults. Participants also reflected on the fraught and politicised
nature of current debates. These impacted on their wellbeing and by closing down
debate, made it more difficult to pursue options consistent with how they felt.
The possibility of diverse outcomes is refuted by some and not seen as helpful by
others. Highlighting diversity, however, does not discredit or devalue those who wish
to celebrate their transition and the euphoria it brings them. Nor should it exclude the
voices of those who have doubts or regrets. We risk injustice if this diversity and
multiplicity is not supported by service delivery. For young people and young adults,
their priority is to establish a social context in which they can flourish and feel
comfortable. Parents and clinicians share these aspirations.

Social inclusion and

positive relationships, free from discrimination and in which an individual is accepted,
respected and valued, represent an important priority for those - and their families who seek support from health and social care agencies

13

Appendix 3

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 4

OVERVIEW OF STUDY DEVELOPMENT
Assessment, Management and Outcomes for
Children and Young People Referred to a National
Gender Identity Development Service

1

Assessment, Management and Outcomes for Children and Young People Referred to a
National Gender Identity Development Service
Introduction
Some children and young people experience significant levels of gender related distress in their
course of their development arising from a persistent mismatch between their gender identity and
their registered sex at birth. The numbers of children and young people referred to the Tavistock
and Portman’s Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS) - the NHS funded service for young
people with gender related distress in England and Wales - increased markedly during the 2010s,
resulting in lengthy waiting times and uncertainty for young people and their families. There have
also been significant changes in the characteristics of young people referred, including an increase in
the number of birth registered females and an over representation of young people who have traits
or a diagnosis of autistic spectrum conditions. There is therefore an urgent need to understand the
characteristics, needs, management options and outcomes of this changing population.
The intention of this study was to use data collected within the NHS - including data from the
Tavistock Gender Identity Development Service, hospital wards, outpatient clinics, emergency
departments and adult gender identity clinics - to assess the intermediate and longer-term
outcomes for children and young people referred to the GIDS service. It would have examined the
changing features of these children (including age at referral, co-occurring diagnoses of autism and
other mental health difficulties), assessed if some groups of children are more likely to follow a
medical approach to managing their gender related distress, and explored patterns of longer-term
outcomes including successful transition, detransition and mental health outcomes.
These data would have provided children and their families with vital information on the different
options for managing gender related distress and provided evidence for clinicians and policy makers
delivering services for these children and young people. Ultimately, the study was not carried out, as
the cooperation of all adult gender identity clinics could not be secured.
Overall aim: To examine the changing epidemiology of gender related distress in children and young
people, in addition to their appropriate social, clinical, psychological and medical management.
Objectives: 1) To describe the clinical and demographic characteristics of this population of children
and their clinical management in the GIDS service; and 2) To assess the intermediate outcomes of
this population of children using national healthcare data.

2

Methods
Patient and public involvement and stakeholder engagement
A series of six online consultation events were held from Feb to June 2022. These events were
advertised via GIDS stakeholder groups, the Yellow Door young person’s group, Stonewall, Trans
Actual, Mermaids and Gendered Intelligence. Across the sessions we spoke to 22 individuals. This
was a mix of trans and gender questioning adolescents and young adults (n=12) and the parents of
children and young people (n=10) who have been seen, or were waiting to be seen, at GIDS. Two
further sessions were held in Autumn 2022, with another 23 individuals attending. Further
engagement was planned during the study, following initial data analyses.
A study specific opt out was planned, with patient and carer information produced in both written
and animated form. This material would have been advertised via the Tavistock GIDS service, other
support organisations, and the University of York websites for 3 months prior to data extraction,
directing prospective study participants to contact the Tavistock or their adult clinic if they did not
wish their data to be used in the study. Any existing national opt outs would also be upheld.
Research design, participants and sample size
•

Retrospective secondary analysis of the Tavistock GIDS data and linked population level
datasets available for children and young people referred to the GIDS service.

•

All children, teenagers or young adults aged 18 years old or younger at the point of referral to
GIDS, who were referred to GIDS between 2009 and 2020.

•

A full population cohort (estimated 9,000 participants).

Data Sources
The primary data source is clinical data from the Tavistock GIDS service linked to:
1. Data from the paediatric endocrinology services at University College London Hospital and
Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust.
2. Data from the NHS Gender Identity Clinics for Adults in England:
•

The Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust, Gender Identity Clinic, London

•

Leeds Gender Identity Clinic, Leeds

•

Northampton Gender Identity Clinic, Daventry

•

Northern Region Gender Dysphoria Service, Newcastle

•

The Nottingham Centre for Transgender Health

•

Porterbrook Clinic Gender Identity Service, Sheffield

•

The Laurels Gender Identity Clinic, Exeter

3

3. Other healthcare data held by NHS Data and Analytics:
•

Hospital Episodes Data – Accident and Emergency (pre 2019) and Emergency Care (from
2019) datasets

•

Hospital Episodes Data – Admitted Patient Care

•

Hospital Episodes Data – Outpatient

•

Mental Health Minimum data set

•

Community prescribing data

•

Death Registration data

Data Extraction
Demographic data held at the Tavistock GIDS service would be extracted from electronic patient
records. Additional clinical data would require manual extraction from paper and/or electronic
records. For more recent referrals much of this information will be available on a summary
assessment and discharge forms. A unique study ID (pseudonym) would be used to retain the link
between the non-identifiable data collected and confidential patient data. The confidential patient
data would be retained on the Tavistock system until required for transfer to NHS Data and Analytics
for linkage with their datasets. Pseudonymised data would be securely transferred to the
Department of Health Sciences server at the University of York.
For assessment of outcomes, confidential patient data required for linkage to other NHS datasets
(date of birth, NHS Number, postcode and birth registered sex) would be extracted from electronic
records held at the Tavistock clinic and the Adult GIC clinics. To reduce flows of confidential patient
data, this would only include those aged up to age 30 years (the oldest young person referred to
GIDS in 2009 would be 30 in 2020). All data linkages would be undertaken by NHS Data and
Analytics. The University of York team would receive pseudonymised clinical data from the
Tavistock, UCLH, NHS Digital and Adult GIC clinics and would be data controller for the study. For
both objectives a successful application was made to the Confidentiality Advisory Group (under
section 251 of the National Health Service Act 2006 and its current Regulations, the Health Service
(Control of Patient Information) Regulations 2002). The NHS Act 2006 and the Regulations enable
the common law duty of confidentiality to be temporarily lifted so that confidential patient
information can be transferred to an applicant without the discloser being in breach of the common
law duty of confidentiality.
Compliance with the Gender Recognition Act (GRA) is required for the second objective. Advice was
therefore sought from the National Data Guardian and a request was made to the Secretary of State
for Heath to enact Section 22, Point 5 of the GRA as the legal basis for this study. A Statutory
Instrument was laid by the Secretary of State for Health for the specific purposes of this study,
coming into force on the 28th July 2022 for a duration of 5 years.

4

Data analysis
Objective 1
A population based retrospective cohort study would have been undertaken using data from
electronic and paper records in the GIDS. The population would include all children and young people
referred to the Tavistock GIDS resident in England referred from 2009 to 2020. These analyses would
aim to:
•

Describe the demographics of children referred to GIDS;

•

Assess the treatment pathways, including endocrine treatment, of children in GIDS;

•

Describe the referral sources of children referred to GIDS;

•

Describe the destination of children after GIDS assessment.

The demographic profile of this cohort would be described using counts and percentages for
categorical data (e.g., ethnic origin) and means and standard deviation for continuous data (e.g., age
at referral). Demographic data would include whether children had begun puberty at the point of
referral. Clinical activity data would include numbers of appointments and clinical assessments,
source of referral and destination on discharge.
Treatment pathways are an important outcome for this population, so log-binomial or robust
(modified) Poisson regression models would be used to assess clinical and demographic associations
with likelihood of referral for endocrine treatment. Statistical models would use binary outcomes
(referred or not referred to endocrine clinics) with independent variables selected from
demographic data (ethnic group, deprivation group, birth sex) and other clinical data (e.g. cooccurring conditions such as autism) and puberty status at referral, based on model fit as assessed
by Akaike's Information Criterion and the Bayesian Information Criterion.
Objective 2
Following data linkage, an assessment of data quality and completeness would be undertaken for
key clinical and demographic variables. Key outcome data derived from the linked healthcare data
would include: surgical and medical management of gender dysphoria; mental health diagnoses and
treatment; and co-occurring diagnoses of autistic spectrum disorder. Destinations of young people
referred to the Tavistock clinic would be described in terms of the proportion: accessing assessment
and psychosocial support only; prescribed hormone blocking treatment only; prescribed hormone
blocking treatment followed by cross sex hormone treatment; accessing sex reassignment surgery in
adulthood; appearing to have de-transitioned; with a co-occurring mental health diagnosis; with a
diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorder; self-harming. Appropriate statistical models would be used
to assess whether any clinical or demographic features, including puberty status at referral, are
associated with these outcomes.

5

Regulatory requirements, data protection and patient confidentiality
The ethical aspects of this study were reviewed and approved by a Research Ethics Committee of the
Health Research Authority (REF 22/HRA/3277). The use of confidential patient data without consent
was approved by the Confidentiality Advisory Group (CAG) of the Health Research Authority. CAG is
an independent body which provides expert advice on the use of confidential patient information
(REF 22/CAG/0129).
All investigators and research staff would comply with the requirements of The Data Protection Act
2018, the UK’s implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), with regards to
the collection, storage, processing, and disclosure of personal information. Data storage and
handling would comply with data controllers, processers, and University of York policies, including
locked storage, password protection, and encryption of the pseudonymised data. Data would be
archived for 5 years following the end of the project. Data would be stored in the University of York
in accordance with GDPR and the University of York guidelines. At the end of the default retention
period (5 years) all data would be confidentially destroyed by a secure method.
Steering group
A Study Steering Committee was established with an independent chair and representation from
topic experts and academics. This panel would meet three times per year to assess progress of the
study against the defined milestones and deliverables and provide advice and expertise to the Study
Management Team.

Stopping the study
Conduct of the study was contingent on gaining access to the relevant patient data and securing the
full cooperation of the gender identity clinics. Following study approval by the Health Research
Authority, the research team contacted clinical leads at GIDS and each of the Adult Gender Identity
Clinics to establish collaborative links and confirm capacity and capability to support the study.
Systematic steps were taken to clarify the aims and motivations of the research, understand and
address any concerns of clinic staff, and to propose alternative approaches and solutions where
appropriate. Negotiations took place between August and November 2023, after which six of the
seven adult clinics declined to support the study. Common reasons given by the clinics for nonparticipation are summarised in Table 1. Clinics also rejected the option to conduct the initial datalinkage phase of the study only (i.e. to provide patient name, date of birth and NHS number but no
other clinical data). The decision to stop the study was therefore taken on November 30, 2023.

6

Table 1: Adult gender identity clinics’ reasons for non-participation in the data linkage study
Area of concern
Accessing patient records

Specific issue
• Paper records started to be replaced by electronic records in
2012, but were still in use in 2020. Identifying eligible patients
and extracting data would therefore be labour intensive.
• Where available, electronic records may not contain all the
required data, and searches of paper records may still be
required.
• Only a minority of attendees at the adult clinics will have
previously attended GIDS, potentially making them more
difficult to identify.

Resource provision

•
•
•

Data completeness and
linkage

•

Clinics lack resources and knowledge to answer patient queries
in relation to the study.
Some clinics felt obliged to contact all eligible patients directly
to inform them of the study (see ethical considerations).
Extracting clinical data from notes, even when performed by
external researchers, would require supervision by a clinician
with epidemiological research experience and local knowledge
of the current and historical formatting and archiving of notes.

Changes to NHS numbers, postcodes and/or gender would
make record linkage between GIDS and adult clinics extremely
challenging.

University of York response
• Support is in place to cover clinics’ workload in relation to
research studies, including extraction of clinical data (see
resource provision).
• The study could be conducted in two phases, with the first
phase only requiring clinics to provide patient name, date of
birth and NHS number for the purposes of linkage. This
would not require an extensive search of paper records.
• Clinics would not have to identify patients who previously
attended GIDS themselves, as attendance would be
established through the data linkage process conducted by
NHS Data and Analytics.
• Queries about the study would be referred to the dedicated
study website, which includes infographics, patient
information, opt-out arrangements, a full study protocol and
a contact e-mail.
• Rigorous patient data safeguards are in place (see ethical
considerations).
• Research support is available to clinics through the Clinical
Research Network to cover costs associated with basic data
extraction, and researchers employed by the University of
York would carry out the most labour-intensive activities
relating to detailed data extraction (retrieval of clinical
activity data from patient notes). Negotiations between the
clinics and the funder (NHS England) could identify additional
research support funding to cover the cost of local
supervision where appropriate, although it is acknowledged
that long-standing workload and recruitment pressures
present significant challenges to the provision of support for
research in this area.
• These are standard challenges for health services research in
general and data linkage studies in particular. University of
York researchers and analysts based at NHS Data and
Analytics have extensive experience in conducting complex

7

•
•

•
Study methodology

•
•

Ethical considerations

•
•
•

Data missingness is likely to be not-at-random, particularly for
people who de-transition/re-transition.
Changes in clinical protocols, differences in protocols between
clinics and (mis)understanding of those protocols (e.g. whether
hormone treatment is required prior to surgery) may confound
the study when attempting to associate treatments with
outcomes.
Neurodiversity is likely to effect outcomes but may not be well
recorded in clinical records, leading to potential confounding.
The study outcomes focus on adverse health events, for which
the clinics do not feel primarily responsible.
Detailed definitions for study variables were not provided in the
protocol, including the conceptualisation and measurement of
detransition.

There was insufficient involvement of clinic staff and service
users in study design and development.
People with additional vulnerabilities may be less likely to opt
out or may need more support to opt out from the study.
Trust data responsibilities and governance of patient data
requires clinics to actively seek consent from all service users
before sharing any information, and therefore an opt out
(rather than an opt in) was not appropriate.

data linkage studies, addressing issues of missingness and
dealing with confounding variables.

•

•

•

•

•

The purpose of the study is not to audit quality of care but to
assess patterns of outcomes in the population. Inevitably,
this will include adverse outcomes as these are of concern to
both patients and providers.
Detailed definitions would be developed in line with the
literature and clinical guidelines, and in consultation with
clinic staff.
The final protocol was developed in consultation with
clinicians, service users and international experts in the
field. The research team liaised with the adult clinics at the
study development stage but there was a general
reluctance on the part of the clinics to engage.
Public and patient engagement sessions were conducted in
the early stages of protocol development, and participants
were generally supportive of the study and the use of their
data. Many expected their data to be routinely collated and
analysed by the NHS and associated researchers as part of
its quality improvement work.
The UK has a stringent series of safeguards covering the use
of patient data in research (including Health Research
Authority approval, anonymisation of patient data, and
General Data Protection Regulations). Additional specific
safeguards (including the Statutory Instrument, and the 3
month opt-out period) were put in place for this study.
Additional support for vulnerable patients would be
discussed with clinics and patient groups.

8

Concerns about funder
motivation and political
interference

•

•

•

The unintended outcome of the study is likely to be a highprofile national report that will be misinterpreted,
misrepresented or actively used to harm patients and disrupt
the work of practitioners across the gender dysphoria pathway.
Taking part in a study of this kind could bring into question the
integrity of clinic staff and the relationships they have with
patients.
The study may not be fully independent, and may suffer from
interference by NHS England, the Cass Review Team and
Government ministers whose interests do not align with those
of providers and users of gender identity services.

•

•

•

Given that there are no existing national level assessments
of longer-term outcomes in this patient group, the potential
for misinterpretation or misuse of study findings is
insufficient reason for not conducting research in this area.
The research team is mindful of the context for the
research, having previously conducted systematic reviews
and qualitative interviews with service users, and in some
cases having direct clinical experience of working with
patients. Although it is not possible to control all public
responses to published research, the research team would
take all reasonable steps to avoid misinterpretation and to
ensure study outputs carried clear messaging that reflected
the sensitivities surrounding this issue.
Although the study is funded by NHS England, the research
team is fully independent and not subject to interference by
the Cass Review, NHS England or any other external agency.
The research team is experienced in handling sensitive
research topics and in publishing research which is critical of
funding bodies and government policy.

9

10

Appendix 4

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 5

PRELIMINARY REPORT
Epidemiology and Outcomes for Children and
Young People with Gender Dysphoria:
Retrospective Cohort Study Using Electronic
Primary Care Records

1

Epidemiology and Outcomes for Children and Young People with Gender Dysphoria:
Retrospective Cohort Study Using Electronic Primary Care Records
Introduction
The number of children and young people referred to the Tavistock and Portman’s Gender Identity
Development Service (GIDS) - the NHS funded service for young people with gender related distress
in England and Wales - rose markedly during the 2010s, resulting in lengthy waiting times and
uncertainty for young people and their families. Additionally, there has been a marked increase in
referrals of adolescent birth-registered females and an over-representation of children with autism
or autism spectrum traits. Recent reviews by the National Institute for Health & Care Excellence
(NICE) on the medical treatment of these children highlighted a lack of evidence of effectiveness and
low quality of the published literature. There is also a lack of evidence on outcomes for these
children and adolescents, and their presentation in primary care.
Overall aim: To use electronic primary care records to describe the epidemiology of gender
dysphoria in people aged 18 and under in England from 2009 to 2021.
Objectives: To estimate for people aged 18 and under with gender dysphoria:
● Changes in incidence and prevalence over time.
● Prevalence of co-occurring autistic spectrum disorders.
● Frequency of primary care prescribing and duration of treatment with puberty blockers and
hormones.
● Prevalence of obesity, smoking, self-harm and common mental health conditions compared
with people with autism spectrum disorders, eating disorder and no long-term condition.
This preliminary analysis covers the first two objectives; subsequent reports will cover prescribing
and co-occurrence of other conditions.
Study population: People aged 18 and under with gender dysphoria and age matched controls with
autism and an eating disorder. The final study population consisted of:
• 3,782 people with gender dysphoria;
• 18,740 matched controls with autism spectrum disorder;
• 13,951 matched controls with eating disorder;
• 18,871 matched controls with no recorded long-term condition.

Methods
Data were derived from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD), a database of
anonymised patient data from general practices across the UK linked to other health-related data,
including routine and emergency hospital attendance and Office for National Statistics mortality
data. The database holds data for over 18 million currently registered patients. The study population
was identified using primary care code lists (READ and SNOMED) covering clinical activities (including
diagnosis, symptoms, treatment and referrals) and secondary care codes (Hospital Episode Statistics)
indicative of relevant conditions. Co-existing conditions (for example, anxiety and depression) were
identified using similar methods. Key covariates included age and local area deprivation (based on
the Index of Multiple Deprivation for the postcode of residence). Patient inclusion criteria included:

2

at least one year of registration with a practice with research-standard data; primary care record
linked to secondary care data; and postcode of residence available.
People with gender dysphoria were matched by age to three groups of controls: people with autism
spectrum disorders; people with eating disorder; and people with no recorded long-term condition.
We aimed to match cases to 5 controls with each condition, but due to low numbers an average of
3.7 controls with eating disorder were matched. Matching was performed on year of birth and index
date for controls, on or before index date of cases (i.e. matches must have been diagnosed with the
relevant condition before the case was diagnosed with gender dysphoria). Controls were not
matched on recorded gender in part due to limitations in the categorization of gender within CPRD.
The gender data category allows options of ‘male’, ‘female’ and ‘other’; as people are first registered
at birth if born in the UK, this category generally refers to registered sex, but can subsequently be
changed at the patient’s request to reflect their gender identity (see strengths and limitations). In
this study, we use the category term recorded in the CPRD database.
Incidence rates were calculated by dividing the number of new cases in a given year by the persontime at risk. Prevalence was calculated by counting the number of individuals in the dataset
registered with practices on 1 July in each year with a diagnosis code recorded on or before that
date. This number was divided by the total number of individuals in the dataset registered on 1 July
and multiplied by 10,000 to give prevalence per 10,000 people. This method produces an upper limit
estimate of recorded prevalence (see strengths and limitations). Prescribing data in CPRD were used
to assess the proportion of cases and controls receiving relevant medications at each point in time.
Comparative analyses of incidence of co-existing conditions and outcomes were calculated using
incidence rate ratios, adjusting for common confounders (for example, age and local area
deprivation).
To protect patient anonymity, published results are subject to small number suppression and no
results for fewer than 10 people are reported. There were few missing data except for month of
birth (year of birth was used to calculate age). No attempt was made to impute missing data for
demographic information due to the low numbers of missing data (under 1% missing for the
deprivation category; zero missing for gender) and the lack of relevant information on which to build
an imputation model.

Results
Recording of gender dysphoria was rare before the age of 10, increasing in frequency with each
additional year up to age 16, the most common age at diagnosis. New cases for ages 18 and under
increased from <0.1 per 10,000 person years in 2009 to 4.4 (95%CI 4.1-4.7) per 10,000 in 2021, with
a decline in 2020, the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 1). Overall recorded prevalence
increased from <0.1 per 10,000 persons in 2009 to 8.3 (95%CI 7.9-8.7) per 10,000 in 2021, with the
highest recorded prevalence in the 17-18 age group (42.2, 95%CI 39.1-45.2 per 10,000 in 2021).
Incidence of new cases was similar for patients registered as male and female up to 2014, after
which incidence increased at up to twice the rate for patients registered as female (Figure 2).

3

Figure 1: Incidence and recorded prevalence of gender dysphoria by age group

Note: shaded areas on prevalence graph denote 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 2: Incidence and recorded prevalence of gender dysphoria by registered gender

Note: shaded areas on prevalence graph denote 95% confidence intervals.
Patients can request to have their recorded gender changed on their clinical records without undergoing
gender reassignment treatment, and CPRD reports the latest recorded gender only.

4

Figure 3: Co-occurrence of gender dysphoria and autism spectrum disorder, overall and by age
group

Note: shaded areas denote 95% confidence intervals.
Due to low numbers of people with gender dysphoria, estimates of the prevalence of co-occurring conditions
before 2014 are imprecise, as indicated by the wide confidence intervals.

Figure 4: Co-occurrence of depression, anxiety and gender dysphoria

Note: shaded areas denote 95% confidence intervals.
Due to low numbers of people with gender dysphoria, estimates of the prevalence of co-occurring conditions
before 2014 are imprecise, as indicated by the wide confidence intervals.

5

In 2015, 6.8% (95%CI 3.5-10.1%) of people with gender dysphoria also had a diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder, increasing to 16.6% (95%CI 14.8-18.4%) by 2021. Trends in recorded prevalence
did not vary substantially by age group (Figure 3). Recorded co-occurrence of depression and anxiety
increased over time, reaching 15.0% (95%CI 13.3-16.8%) and 13.8% (95%CI 12.1-15.5%) respectively
in 2021 (Figure 4).

Overview of the findings
In our sample of general practices, recorded prevalence of gender dysphoria in people aged 18 and
under increased over a hundred-fold between 2009 and 2021. This increase occurred in two phases;
a gradual increase between 2009 and 2014, followed by an acceleration from 2015 onwards.
Increases in this second phase were more rapid for people registered as female, although clinical
records do not indicate whether their recorded gender had been changed (see strengths and
limitations).
Throughout the study period, presentations predominantly occurred in the teenage years, and over
half of people with a recorded history of gender dysphoria were in the 17-18 age group. A
substantial minority of people with a history of gender dysphoria also had a recorded diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder, and the proportion of people with such a diagnosis increased over time.
Depression and anxiety were also more frequently reported over time, approaching 15% of people
with gender dysphoria by 2021.

Strengths and limitations
These analyses draw on the complete primary care records of 3,782 children and young adults with a
record of gender dysphoria derived from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink database, linked to
other relevant health-related datasets. CPRD provides a large, comprehensive and nationally
representative cohort covering all aspects of primary care and (through general practices’
gatekeeping and care coordination role) secondary and tertiary care. The database facilitates
investigation of rare exposures and events, such as gender dysphoria, and minimises selection and
information bias as almost all residents in England are registered with a general practitioner soon
after birth and practices collect data prospectively.
CPRD data also has several limitations, however, leading to risks of both under-reporting and overreporting of gender dysphoria. Data are recorded by general practice staff for the purpose of clinical
care and not primarily for research, hence key information may be inconsistently recorded,
particularly for uncommon conditions such as gender dysphoria, with which individual practitioners
may less familiar. Practices may also not record that a long-term condition has resolved, hence our
results report the proportion of people at a given point in time with a record of gender dysphoria at
any point in their history. This will be higher than the proportion of people who currently have
gender dysphoria. Conversely, for co-occurring conditions such anxiety and depression, the analyses
presented in this preliminary report are restricted to those with a recorded diagnosis, which may
underestimate the number of people with symptoms of anxiety and depression, or receiving
treatment.
Studies based on primary care records also face challenges with respect to classifying patient sex and
gender, and this presents a particular problem for studies of gender dysphoria. Patients can request

6

to have their recorded gender category changed on their clinical records without undergoing gender
reassignment treatment, and are then registered as a new patient with their previous medical
information transferred to their new record. CPRD reports the latest recorded gender category only,
so it is not possible to assess complete gender histories or to make definitive statements about
patient sex. In our results, ‘male’ and ‘female’ refer to the gender recorded by the practice.

7

8

Appendix 5

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identit y ser vices for children and young people

Appendix 6

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair
Independent Review of Gender Identity
Services for Children and Young People

John Stewart
National Director
Specialised Commissioning
NHS England
Sent by email
19 July 2022
Dear John
INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF GENDER IDENTITY SERVICES FOR CHILDREN
AND YOUNG PEOPLE – FURTHER ADVICE
In my interim report I provided advice that in order to meet current demand and
provide a more holistic and localised approach to care, gender identity services for
children and young people need to move from a single national provider to a regional
model.
I have since met with potential providers, Royal Colleges and support and advocacy
groups to discuss the essential components of the proposed new model. I will
continue with these conversations, including a programme of engagement with
service users and their families, but wanted to share the outcome of discussions to
date.
Essential components of a new model
A comprehensive patient and family centred service and package of care is needed
to ensure children and young people who are questioning their gender identity or
experiencing gender dysphoria get on the right pathway for them as an individual. A
shared care arrangement is needed to enable children and young people to receive
supportive care and appropriate treatment as close to home as possible. This would
also improve integration between different children’s services, facilitate appropriate
access to local community support services, improve the experience of care, and
support the transition between children’s and adult services that are appropriate for
the individual.

Regional centres
Regional centres should be commissioned as specialist centres to manage the
caseload of children requiring support around their gender identity. The regional
centres should be experienced providers of tertiary paediatric care to ensure a focus
on child health and development, with strong links to mental health services. They
should have established academic and education functions to ensure that ongoing
research and training is embedded within the service delivery model. The centres
should have an appropriate multi-professional workforce to enable them to manage
the holistic needs of this population, as well as the ability to provide essential related
services or be able to access such services through provider collaborations. These
should include, but not be limited to: mental health services; services for children and
young people with autism and other neurodiverse presentations; and for the
subgroup for whom medical treatment may be considered appropriate, access to
endocrinology services and fertility services. There should also be expertise in
safeguarding, support of looked-after children and children who have experienced
trauma. Staff should maintain a broad clinical perspective by working across related
services within the tertiary centre and between tertiary and secondary centres in
order to embed the care of children and young people with gender-related distress
within a broader child and adolescent health context.
Designated local specialist services
The regional centres will need to work collaboratively with local services within their
geography. However, recognising that not all local services will have the capacity,
capability and/or aspiration to support the care of children and young people with
gender-related distress, I would recommend initially identifying a smaller number of
secondary services within Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS)
and paediatrics to act as designated local specialist services within each area.
This would give the opportunity to provide targeted training, upskilling and additional
staffing to a more manageable number of centres within a geography. Similar
models exist in the provision of children’s cancer services where there are
designated Paediatric Oncology Shared Care Units (POSCUs)1 and in neonatal care
where there are designated Local Neonatal Units (LNUs).2
Operational delivery network
The regional centres should be responsible for overseeing the shared care model,
working through an operational delivery network (ODN) or similar mechanism that
can fulfil the stated purposes of ODNs3 which include:
•
•

ensuring effective clinical flows through the provider system through clinical
collaboration for networked provision of services
taking a whole system, collaborative provision approach to ensure the delivery
of safe and effective services across the patient pathway

1 NHS England (2021). Service Specification: Children's Cancer Network - Principal Treatment

Centres
2 NHS England. Service Specification: Neonatal Critical Care (Intensive Care, HDU and Special Care)
3 NHS Commissioning Board (2012). Developing Operational Delivery Networks: The Way Forward

•
•
•

•

•

improving cross-organisational, multi-professional clinical engagement to
improve pathways of care
enabling the development of consistent provider guidance and improved
service standards, ensuring a consistent patient and family experience
focusing on quality and effectiveness through the facilitation of comparative
benchmarking and auditing of services, with implementation of required
improvements
fulfilling a key role in assuring providers and commissioners of all aspects of
quality as well as coordinating provider resources to secure the best
outcomes for patients across wide geographical areas
supporting capacity planning and activity monitoring with collaborative
forecasting of demand, and matching of demand and supply

Key to this model is the governance role of the network in maintaining standards of
care and ensuring equitable access.
Pathways of care
I would recommend that consideration is given to intake procedures that ensure
that children and young people referred to these services are able to access the
most appropriate package of support at the earliest feasible point in their journey.
One model might be that each regional centre would host a regular intake meeting
involving multi-professional staff from the tertiary centre, the designated local
specialist services and other relevant local children’s services. Discussions with
Gender Identity Development Service clinicians have highlighted the importance of
differentiating different subgroups within the referred population who may be at risk
and/or need more urgent support, assessment or intervention; there may also be
subgroups where early advice to parents or school staff may be a more appropriate
first step. Given that it is not always possible to make these judgements based on
written referral information, consideration should be given to ring-fencing senior
clinical time to make early contact with referrers or families in order to ensure that
children and young people are allocated to an appropriate pathway.
There should be a whole system approach to care across the network so that
children and young people can access a broad range of services relevant to their
individual needs, including supportive exploration and counselling. This is important
both for those who go on to medical transition and those who resolve their gender
distress in other ways. There should be the ability to move flexibly between different
elements of the service in a step-up or step-down model, allowing children and
young people and their families/carers to make decisions at their own pace without
requiring rereferral into the system.
Stakeholders have raised the need for individuals who are distinct from the
professionals that they view as ‘gatekeeping’ access to the medical treatment to
provide support and a safe space for questioning. There is considerable scope for
local innovation and partnerships with voluntary sector organisations in developing
these services in a range of settings.

The appropriate age for transition to adult services will need further discussion,
balancing the workload and capacity of services for children and young people with
the need to provide ongoing holistic family-centred care during a critical point in the
young person’s gender care, particularly for those with neurodiversity/special
educational needs or other vulnerabilities.
National provider collaborative/research network
I have already stated that the regional centres should have regular co-ordinated
national provider meetings and operate to shared standards and operating
procedures. The development of protocols for assessment and treatment to ensure
such consistency is an important strand of the work of the Review, and this will be
based on best available evidence, the findings from our commissioned research, and
expert opinion.
There should also be agreement regarding collection of a core dataset to inform
service improvement and research, based on similar approaches already established
in other specialities, for example, in paediatric critical care.4
To achieve this end, I would recommend that a formal national provider
collaborative with an integral research network is established, bringing together
clinical and academic representatives from the regional centres. The national
provider collaborative should undertake a range of functions including:
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

a forum for discussion of complex cases and/or decisions about medical care,
and ultimately subsuming the role of the Multi-Professional Review Group
an ethics forum for cases where there is uncertainty or disagreement about
best interests or appropriate care
providing opportunities for peer review between regional centres
development of a programme of ongoing Continuing Professional
Development for staff at all levels, as well as educational standards for
practitioners within the various tiers of service provision
collation of the national dataset and conduct of national audit
development of a quality improvement programme to ensure evolving best
practice
ongoing research in areas of weak evidence

Independent oversight of data collection, audit and quality improvement (for
example, through a Healthcare Quality Improvement Partnership-commissioned
approach) will ensure the highest possible standards of data management and
utilisation.
Embedding research in clinical practice
My interim report highlighted the gaps in the evidence base regarding all aspects of
gender care for children and young people, from epidemiology through to

4 PICANet – Paediatric Intensive Care Audit Network for the UK and Ireland

assessment, diagnosis, support, counselling and treatment.5 NHS England asked
me to give some further thought as to how these gaps may be addressed.
The Review has already commissioned a research programme which includes a
literature review and both qualitative and quantitative research components.
However, I recognise that this programme will not provide all the answers that are
needed, and an ongoing programme of work will be required.
Given the particular uncertainties regarding long-term outcomes of medical
intervention, and the broader knowledge gaps in this area, there is an imperative to
build research capacity into the national network. This research capacity is needed
to provide ongoing appraisal of new literature and rapid translation into clinical
practice, to continue to identify areas of practice where further research is needed,
and to develop a research portfolio that will inform policy on assessment, support
and clinical care of children with gender dysphoria, from presentation through to
appropriate social, psychological and medical management.
As already highlighted in my interim report, the most significant knowledge gaps are
in relation to treatment with puberty blockers, and the lack of clarity about whether
the rationale for prescription is as an initial part of a transition pathway or as a
‘pause’ to allow more time for decision making. For those who will go on to have a
stable binary trans identity, the ability to pass in later life is paramount, and many will
decide that the trade-offs of medical treatment are a price that is fully justified by the
ability to live confidently and comfortably in their identified gender. The widely
understood challenge is in determining when a point of certainty about gender
identity is reached in an adolescent who is in a state of developmental maturation,
identity development and flux.
It is the latter option regarding a ‘pause’ for decision making about which we have
the least information. The rationale for use of puberty blockers at Tanner Stage 2 of
development was based on data that demonstrated that children, particularly birthregistered boys who had early gender incongruence, were unlikely to desist once
they reached early puberty; this rationale does not necessarily apply to laterpresenting young people, including the predominant referral group of birth-registered
girls. We do not fully understand the role of adolescent sex hormones in driving the
development of both sexuality and gender identity through the early teen years, so
by extension we cannot be sure about the impact of stopping these hormone surges
on psychosexual and gender maturation. We therefore have no way of knowing
whether, rather than buying time to make a decision, puberty blockers may disrupt
that decision-making process.
A further concern is that adolescent sex hormone surges may trigger the opening of
a critical period for experience-dependent rewiring of neural circuits underlying

5 Olson-Kennedy, J, Cohen-Kettenis, P. T, Kreukels, B. P, Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F, Garofalo, R, Meyer,

W, & Rosenthal, S. M. (2016). Research priorities for gender nonconforming/transgender youth:
gender identity development and biopsychosocial outcomes. Current opinion in endocrinology,
diabetes, and obesity 23(2), 172–179. DOI:10.1097/MED.0000000000000236.

executive function6 (i.e. maturation of the part of the brain concerned with planning,
decision making and judgement). If this is the case, brain maturation may be
temporarily or permanently disrupted by puberty blockers, which could have
significant impact on the ability to make complex risk-laden decisions, as well as
possible longer-term neuropsychological consequences. To date, there has been
very limited research on the short-, medium- or longer-term impact of pubertyblockers on neurocognitive development.
In light of these critically important unanswered questions, I would suggest that
consideration is given to the rapid establishment of the necessary research
infrastructure to prospectively enrol young people being considered for hormone
treatment into a formal research programme with adequate follow up into adulthood,
with a more immediate focus on the questions regarding puberty blockers. The
appropriate research questions and protocols will need to be developed with input
from a panel of academics, clinicians, service users and ethicists.
Without an established research strategy and infrastructure, the outstanding
questions will remain unanswered and the evidence gap will continue to be filled with
polarised opinion and conjecture, which does little to help the children and young
people, and their families and carers, who need support and information on which to
make decisions.
I hope this further advice is helpful as you look to develop a detailed service
specification. I appreciate you will want some time to consider my advice and am
happy to discuss both the longer-term ambition and any interim arrangements that
may be necessary, particularly in relation to the development of the clinical and
research protocols.
Yours sincerely

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair, Independent Review of Gender Identity Services for Children and Young
People

6

Sisk C L (2017). Development: Pubertal Hormones Meet the Adolescent Brain: Current Biology.
27(14): 706-708. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.092.

Appendix 6

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 7

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair
Independent Review of Gender Identity
Services for Children and Young People

National Director
Specialised Commissioning
NHS England
Sent by email

31 January 2023

Dear John
As the Review moves into its final phase, I thought it would be helpful to provide an update
on progress since my last letter, to outline the Review timetable going forward, and highlight
some areas in which NHS England (NHSE) and colleagues across the system may be able
to help achieve the Review’s objectives.
Over the last few months, the Review has continued to engage with key stakeholders across
the statutory and voluntary sectors, as well as leaders of professional organisations, and I
have had ongoing listening sessions with individuals who have direct service experience.
The Review’s commissioned research team is making excellent progress with the systematic
reviews, a review of existing guidelines, an international survey of services in countries with
comparable healthcare systems, and the qualitative research. We will have outputs from
these pieces of work by the spring. I have also established a Clinical Expert Group, including
representatives of professional bodies, NHSE’s phase one provider units, gender experts
and others with expertise in children and young people’s care, to help us interpret the
findings of this research. Alongside this, the Review is engaging with service users to gain
insight into their perspectives on these initial findings.
We have discussed previously the fact that the commissioned data linkage study (part of our
quantitative research programme), which represents a unique opportunity to collect longerterm outcome data on this population, has been much more complex than initially envisaged,
and is taking longer to establish. However, I am pleased to say that we have now received
provisional approvals and will soon be moving into the next phase of the work, which will
involve detailed information for service users and the option to opt out before
commencement of any data collection. The full protocol will be published on our website.
I anticipate that by the summer, in addition to the strands of work described above, we will
have some information on the intermediate outcomes for children and young people with
gender dysphoria, as well as the changing characteristics of this group, using data which is
already routinely collected within the NHS. However, the complexities encountered in
establishing the data linkage study means that the full results of this element will likely not be
available before the Review is concluded. As you know, we have already had discussions
about the logistics of establishing a formal research network (as described in my letter of July
2022) to receive the results of this study, oversee a clinically informed future research
programme and ensure translation into clinical practice.

In the interim, I would like to ask for your help in obtaining some existing data which is of
more immediate importance to understanding the needs of this population:
•

Firstly, to-date the Review has been working on the understanding that around 20%
of children and young people seen by the Gender Identity Development Service
(GIDS) enter a hormone pathway. At this stage, it is crucial for us to verify that this is
an accurate assumption as it has significant bearing on getting a fuller understanding
of the outcomes of the existing clinical approach. I anticipate that it should be
relatively straightforward to clarify this through an audit of discharge summaries and
would be grateful if this could be arranged as swiftly as possible with colleagues at
GIDS.

•

Secondly, I understand from discussions with clinicians, that there has been a
significant change in the demographic of referrals to adult NHS Gender Dysphoria
Clinics (GDCs) – from a more mixed group in terms of age and birth-registered gender
to a population base where a significant majority are under 25, with a higher
proportion of birth registered females. This obviously comprises a mix of referrals
from GIDS and direct referrals to adult clinics. I would be grateful if more robust data
on this could be obtained since it is relevant for thinking about both the transition of
young people to adult services and potential unmet need within the children and
young people’s service.

In terms of broader support, there are a number of strands of work which are outside our
control, but are crucial to the successful delivery of the Review:
•

I would particularly like to thank NHS-Digital for their help to-date in moving forward
on the data linkage and look forward to continuing to work with them on this.

•

I also look forward to working with the adult NHS GDCs, which are a vital part of
understanding the patient journey.

The Review will continue to share information as it becomes available, and I anticipate
submitting a final report to NHSE by the end of the year. Within that, I will be making clear
those issues we consider to be the sole responsibility of the healthcare system and
signposting other issues which fall outside the responsibility of the NHS and require the input
of other agencies and organisations and I will make recommendations accordingly.

Yours sincerely

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair, Independent Review of Gender Identity Services for Children and Young
People

Appendix 7

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 8

The Gender Identity Development
Service Audit Report
June 2023

Contents
Background ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3
Aims and objectives .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 3
Audit scope ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3
Introduction to methodology ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3
Data extraction methodology ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4
Analysis methodology................................................................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction to results ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Theme 1: Patient demographic profile and referral to GIDS...................................................................................................................... 5
Theme 2: Endocrinology referral and care pathway .................................................................................................................................. 7
Theme 3: Patients not referred to endocrinology care pathway ............................................................................................................. 14
Theme 4: Discharge from GIDS – all patients summary .......................................................................................................................... 16
Audit challenges .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 18
References............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 19
Appendices........................................................................................................................................................................................................... 20

2

o

Background
An independent review of gender identity services for children and
young people (The Cass Review: Interim Report), has identified a gap
in the understanding of treatment pathways once patients are within the
Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS) at the Tavistock and
Portman NHS Foundation Trust.
As a result of this, a request by the Cass Review team was submitted to
NHS England to undertake an audit of discharge notes for patients over
a defined period.
NHS England approached NHS Arden and Greater East Midlands
Commissioning Support Unit (the CSU) to undertake this audit on behalf
of the Cass Review team.

Audit aims and objectives
The aim of the audit was to understand the treatment pathways that
children and young people who have entered the GIDS service have
received and explore if there are any inconsistencies between GIDS
providers.
The key objectives of this study were to:
•

Develop a suitable audit template to gather the required
information from patients’ medical records

The evidence from this audit will be used to support the next steps of
the Cass Review.

Audit scope
The following patients were included in the data collection
•

Patients who have attended at least 2 appointments to Tavistock
& Portman NHS Foundation Trust GIDS

•

Patients who have been discharged from the GIDS between 1
April 2018 and 31 December 2022

•

Responsible commissioner is NHS England or NHS Wales

Introduction to methodology
To fulfil the aims and objectives of the study, the CSU developed an
audit template in Microsoft Excel® (see Appendix 1) in collaboration with
key clinicians at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust, to
capture key information that would be extracted from individual patient
records. Drop-down lists were utilised where possible to enable
standardised information to be captured.
The sections of the audit were grouped into the following themes:
•

Patient demographic profile

•

Identify if there are any variations in referrals to endocrinology
across the GIDS teams

•

Initial referral information

•

Capture information about the proportion of patients entering the
GIDS who are subsequently discharged on hormone therapy

•

Endocrinology referral and care pathway

•

Discharge information

•

Understand what care patients have received at the point of
discharge.

•

Other comments

3

o
The CSU identified a clinical workforce to undertake the audit. This
ensured that the audit would be to utilise a clinical workforce who:
1) Were bound by their professional registration for patient

The patient list was grouped according to the GIDS team and allocated
in batches of between 20-50 patients to the audit team who then
reviewed each patient record within Carenotes.

confidentiality
2) Can understand clinical terminology
3) Can interpret information to undertake the audit
4) Can limit the scope of their tasks to achieve the audit aims
Carenotes system training was provided by the Tavistock and Portman
NHS Foundation Trust and individual log-in details were provided to the
team. Recognising staff will be required to work within clinical systems
at the GIDS which contains highly sensitive confidential patient
identifiable information, honorary contracts were put in place between
the individual and the trust.

Data extraction methodology
The Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust provided the CSU
with a list of 3466 patients who had been discharged from the service
between 1 April 2018 and 31 December 2022, covering the following
regional GIDS teams
•

GIDS Midlands (incl. Birmingham)

•

GIDS Leeds

•

GIDS Southeast (incl. London)

•

GIDS Southwest (incl. Exeter and Bristol)

Analysis methodology
To support analysis of the data from the audit, expertise was drawn
from across the CSU.
Data from each individual auditor was cleansed and combined into a
master Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet. Any patients who did not meet the
criteria defined within the audit scope, were excluded from the analysis
Where information was captured as ‘other’, details were provided in the
comments section of the audit template, and these were further grouped
where possible. For example, several patients had been discharged
because they had moved outside of the NHS England and NHS Wales
geography.
In context of the Bell v Tavistock High Court Judgement, the date of the
judgement, 1st December 2020 was used to undertake the analysis. The
terms pre-Bell and post-Bell are used through this report.

4

o

Introduction to results

Table 1.1. Gender profile
Natal Gender (%)

Current gender (%)

73%
27%

22%
61%

Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable

10%
5%
2%

Out of the 3499 patients audited, 3306 were included within the
analysis. Of the 193 who were excluded, patients included those who
were outside of the NHS England or NHS Wales footprint, non-gender
dysphoria patients (for example a patient receiving support due to a
family member undergoing gender reassignment), patients who had
less than 2 appointments at GIDS and patients who had not been
discharged from the service.

Female
Male
Trans-unspecified/Gender
Identity unknown
Non-Binary
Gender questioning

The results from the audit are separated into the following themes:

The distribution of patients natal gender and age at the point of referral
into the GIDS service is shown in chart 1.1. The minimum age of
patients being referred into the GIDS service was 3years, the maximum
age was 18years, with a mean and median of 14years.
Chart 1.1. Distribution of Patient's age on referral and
Natal Gender

Age

1. Patient demographic profile and referral to GIDs
2. Endocrinology referral and care pathway
3. Discharge from GIDs

Theme 1. Patient demographic profile and referral to
GIDs
Gender and age profile
The overall natal and current gender of the patients who were audited is
detailed within table 1.1. Upon referral into the service, 73% of referrals
were for natal female patients, and 27% for those with a natal gender of
male. At the point of discharge from the GIDS, the current gender listed
within the patients Carenotes record identified a larger proportion, 61%
of patients who identified as male.

FEMALE

17+y

MALE

15-16y
13-14y
11-12y
<10 y
2000

1500

1000
500
Number of patients

0

500

5

o
Referral source
48.6% of patients referred to GIDS were referred by CAMHS/CYP
Mental Health Services and 40.68% were referred by their GP practice
(see table 1.2). The largest proportion of referrals from CAMHS/CYP
Mental Health Services were consistent across the GIDS teams and a
full breakdown of the referral source by the GIDS team is provided in
appendix 2.
Table 1.2. Referral source
Referral Source
CAMHS / CYP Mental Health
GP Practice
Children’s or Council Service/Local Authority
Voluntary sector
School
Paediatrics
Healthcare provider - other
Healthcare provider - private
Other

Table 1.3. Primary GIDS team
GIDS Team
GIDS Leeds
GIDS Southeast/London
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter

% of patients
35.27%
28.31%
19.87%
16.55%

Limitations of analysis
% of patients
48.6%
40.7%
3.3%
3.1%
1.8%
1.6%
X
X
X

•

•

The CSU audit identified that although patients were assigned to a
primary GIDS team, often based upon the patient’s location, the GIDS
team where they received their main assessments and care may have
been different to the primary team which has not been analysed.
There were variations in recorded information between clinics, for
example inconsistencies in the information contained within the
closing summaries, patient contract information, spells and referral
letters. Whilst the CSU team tried to adopt as much consistency as
possible, it is recognised that there may be slight variations or
inaccuracies in the information that was obtained, such as referral and
discharge dates.

GIDS team
Table 1.3 shows where patients were assigned their GIDS primary team
as identified in the original patient list received from the Tavistock and
Portman NHS Foundation Trust.

Key findings
• 73% of patients are natal female, and 27% natal male when referred
into the GIDS.
• The largest proportion of referrals into the GIDS are from
CAMHS/CYP Mental Health (48.6%) and GP Practices (40.7%).

6

o

Theme 2. Endocrinology referral and care pathway

Age profile on referral to endocrinology

Across the patients audited, 27% were referred to endocrinology.
Analysis against the Bell judgement was not possible due to the
methodology of the data collection (refer to limitations within this
section). The breakdown of patients by GIDS team is provided in table
2.1.

Patients were referred to endocrinology between the ages of 8 years
and 18 years, although the <10 patients referred post-Bell were all
17years. The mean and median age of referral was 15 years. Chart 2.1
shows the distribution of patients age on referral.
Chart 2.1. Distribution of patients age on referral to
endocrinology
Number of patients

Table 2.1. Percentage of patients under the care of each GIDS
team, referred to endocrinology
GIDS Team
% of patients
All teams
27.0%
GIDS Leeds
32.7%
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
11.1%
GIDS Southeast/London
20.9%
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter
11.7%

400
300
200
100
0
8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Age (years)

Excluding patients who did not attend/engage with the GIDS, the
referral rate to endocrinology was 28%. Excluding this same cohort or
patients along with those who refused the service, the referral rate to
endocrinology was 31%.

The distribution of age broadly similar across the GIDS as shown in
chart 2.2. Excluding patients who did not attend/engage or who refused
the service had no impact on the distribution of the ages.

Gender profile on referral to endocrinology
34.6% of natal males were referred to endocrinology, compared to
24.2% of natal females.
Of the total patients referred into endocrinology, 34% were natal male,
and 66% natal female.

7

o
<10 patients seen by the GIDS Leeds team were referred to
endocrinology after the first appointment due to transfer of care and
were already receiving puberty blocker treatment.

40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

The distribution of appointments is shown in chart 2.3. There was a
similar distribution of appointments according to the GIDS team, full
details are provided in appendix 3.
Post-Bell, <10 patients were referred to endocrinology had 12 or more
appointments with the GIDS prior to the referral.
10 or
11
under
GIDS Leeds

12

GIDS South East/London

13

14

15

16

17 +

Age (years)

Chart 2.3. Distribution of total number of
appointments within the GIDS prior to referral to
endocrinology

GIDS South West/Bristol/Exeter
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham

Appointments with the GIDS prior to referral to endocrinology
Patients received on average a total of 6.7 appointments with GIDS
prior to referral to endocrinology. Analysis against the Bell judgement
identified that patients received an average of 6.6 appointments preBell, and 15.8 appointments post-Bell before being referred to
endocrinology.
Table 2.2 provides a breakdown of appointments by the GIDS referral
team.
Table 2.2. Total number of appointments with GIDS prior to referral
to endocrinology, by GIDS team
GIDS Team
Average
Minimum
Maximum
All teams
6.7
1
44
GIDS Leeds
6.3
1
23
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
6.4
2
22
GIDS Southeast/London
7.8
1
44
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter 5.8
1
14

200

Number of patients

% total patients within GIDS team

Chart 2.2. Distribution of patients age as the
proportion of patients within each GIDS team

150
100
50
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 44

Number of appointments

8

o
Limitations of analysis
•

•

The date of referral to endocrine was captured as part of the
audit collection tool. The audit did not capture the date which
the patient was then seen by endocrinology. Recognising the
waiting times into the service, it was not possible to undertake
analysis against the Bell judgement upon referral into
endocrinology.
The audit criteria focussed on patients who had been
discharged from the GIDS. Therefore there is potentially a
cohort who have not been considered as part of this audit and
thereby referrals into endocrine could be higher than indicated
in this audit.

Key findings
•
•
•
•
•

Overall, 27% of patients were referred to endocrinology. This
was slightly increased when excluding patients who did not
attend/engage with the service or declined the service.
The largest proportion of patients referred to endocrinology
are seen by GIDS Leeds (32.7%) and GIDS
Southeast/London (20.9%).
34.6% of natal males were referred to endocrinology,
compared to 24.2% of natal females.
A higher proportion of patients referred to endocrinology are
aged 15-16years.
Patients receive and average of 6.7 appointments prior to
referral to endocrinology, with a range of 1 to 44.

First interventions within endocrinology
•

First intervention type overview

Table 2.3 shows the first interventions received by patients upon referral
to endocrinology. Please note, the first intervention was not necessarily
the first appointment, where treatment was recommended there were
often a number of appointments required to determine the patients’
suitability for treatment (e.g., DEXA scans and blood tests prior to
commencing puberty blocker treatment).
There was little variation in the first intervention following endocrinology
referral when analysed by GIDS team (see appendix 4).
Of the <10 patients referred post-Bell, X received a puberty blocker
only, X patients were discharged to the Gender Identity Clinic (GIC) and
the other patients decided to access treatment privately. These patients
were aged 16 to 17years of age upon referral.
Table 2.3. First intervention received by patients referred to
endocrinology
First intervention type
% of patients
Puberty Blockers ONLY
81.5%
Patient declined treatment
7.1%
Puberty assessment ONLY
5.6%
Other*
X
DNA
X
Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols
X
Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones
X
Puberty Blocker not started due to JR
X
Did not access physical treatment
X
Cross-sex hormones ONLY
X

9

o
Puberty blocker (NHS before GIDS) AND cross-sex
hormones
Puberty blockers (privately before GIDS) AND
cross-sex hormones

X
X

*Other – first interventions captured as other represent a small
proportion of patients for reasons which include; referral on hold, other
opinion required, discharged to GIC, notes incomplete, puberty blocker
advised but unclear if started, treatment not advised on professional
advice, patient moved from abroad on puberty blocker and referred on
first appointment, puberty blocker not started due to patient
misunderstanding about treatment regime, treatment recommended but
supply issues (GP prescribing or pharmacy).

•

First intervention type by natal gender

The first intervention patients received according to their natal gender
was broadly similar (see appendix 5).
•

Treatment type and patients’ age

Table 2.4. Treatment type and patients age at referral, by GIDS
team
Puberty-blockers ONLY
Average
Minimum
Maximum
age
age
age
All teams
15
8
18
GIDS Leeds
15
8
18
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
15
10
17
GIDS Southeast/London
15
10
18
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter 15
12
17
Cross-sex hormones ONLY
GIDS Leeds
N/A
N/A
N/A
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
N/A
N/A
N/A
GIDS Southeast/London
<10 patients aged 15 years
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter <10 patients aged 17 years
Puberty-blocker and cross-sex hormones
GIDS Leeds
<10 patients aged 15 years
<10 patients aged 16 years
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
<10 patients aged 14 years
GIDS Southeast/London
<10 patients aged 16 and 17 years
GIDS Southwest/Bristol/Exeter N/A
N/A
N/A

Appendix 6 shows the intervention types by age at the point of referral,
against the total proportion of patients referred into endocrinology.
52.5% of patients between 15-16 years received puberty blockers,
followed by those aged 13-14 years of age (16.5%).
For patients receiving puberty blockers and/or cross-sex hormones
upon referral to endocrinology (excluding those who have received
clinical treatments outside of the GIDS), table 2.4 provides information
about the age at which the patients were upon referral, although the
patient may have been older at the point of receiving treatment due to
waiting times to be seen by endocrinology.

10

o
Chart 2.4 shows the distribution of patients ages for those who received
a puberty blocker as their first intervention.

•

Chart 2.4. Distribution of age for patients who
recieved a puberty blocker as their 1st intervention
Number of patients

Key findings

•

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

•

8

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

•

Age (years)

•

81.5% of patients referred into endocrinology received
puberty blockers, of which 52.5% were between 15-16 years
old.
A small number of patients received cross-sex hormones (<10
patients) or both puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones
(<10 patients), as their 1st intervention within the
endocrinology service.
<10 patients who were initially advised to start puberty
blockers did not start treatment due to the Bell judgement. All
patients were aged 16-17years on referral.
Post-Bell, <10 patients received a puberty blocker, <10
patients were discharged to the GIC and <10 patients decided
to access treatment privately.
Patients were on average 15 years old when referred for
puberty blocker treatment.

Limitations of analysis
•

The date that the patient started treatment as part of their first
intervention whilst under the care of the endocrinology team was
not captured, as it was difficult to capture this accurately and was
not part of the audit tool design. The age of the patient upon
referral into endocrinology was therefore used for the analysis.

Final interventions within endocrinology upon discharge from the
GIDS
Table 2.5 shows the end point intervention upon patients discharge from
the GIDS, with 54.8% ending up on both puberty blockers and cross-sex
hormones.
Of the <10 patients who were referred to endocrinology post-Bell, <10
patients who subsequently received puberty blockers remained on the
puberty blocker, but treatment was withdrawn for other patients on
professional advice due to side effects. <10 patients was discharged to
the GIC and did not access physical treatment whilst under the care of
the GIDS, and the final patients decided to access treatment privately.

11

o
Table 2.5. Final intervention received by patients
referred to endocrinology
First intervention type
% of
patients
Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones
54.8%
Puberty Blockers ONLY
19.9%
Patient declined treatment
11.4%
Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols
3.9%
Did not access physical treatment
3.3%
Puberty assessment ONLY
2.0%
Treatment withdrawn - DNA
1.5%
Detransitioned/detransitioning
X
Unknown/unclear
X
Puberty Blocker not started due to JR
X
Treatment recommended but supply issues
(GP prescribing or pharmacy)
X
Treatment withdrawn - professional
advice/side effects
X
Cross-sex hormones ONLY
X
Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones
(privately)
X

•

First intervention puberty blockers: Final intervention type

As shown in table 2.6, 64% of patients who were initially started on a
puberty blocker at their first intervention pre-Bell, ended up on both a
puberty blocker and cross sex-hormone through the GIDS (this does not
include 1 patient who was on both interventions however was accessing
cross-sex hormones privately). 23% of patients remained on a puberty
blocker alone.
Table 2.6. Final intervention received by patients referred to
endocrinology
First intervention type

% of
patients

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones

64.0%

Puberty Blockers ONLY

23.0%

Patient declined treatment

7.3%

Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols

2.1%

Treatment withdrawn - DNA

1.4%

Unknown/unclear

X

Detransitioned/detransitioning

X

Treatment withdrawn - professional advice/side effects X
Appendix 7 shows the final intervention types by age against the total
proportion of patients referred into endocrinology.
The final intervention patients received according to their natal gender
as shown in appendix 8 shows that a higher proportion of natal females
(57.9%) ended up on both puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones
compared to natal males (47.7%). A higher proportion of natal males
(24.7%) ended up on puberty blockers alone compared to natal females
(17.4%).

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones (privately)

X

Treatment recommended but supply issues (GP
prescribing or pharmacy)

X

12

o
•

•

First intervention puberty blockers and cross-sex
hormones: Final intervention type

100% of pts (n=<10) who were started on a puberty blocker and crosssex hormone, remained on the same treatment
•

First intervention initial assessment only: Final intervention
type

Where patients were referred to endocrinology and only received a
puberty assessment at their first intervention, chart 2.5 shows the final
intervention that the patient had following discharge from the GIDS.
Chart 2.5. Final intervention type for patients who
initially only had a puberty assessment on referral
into endocrinology
40.00%

<10 patients who went on to detransition back to their natal gender, all
were female. <10 patients had received puberty blockers as their first
intervention following endocrinology referral, however it was not clear
from the records of the final patient what interventions they had
received. They had received an average of 6.5 appointments prior to
referral to endocrinology (range 3-10 appointments).
Discharge destination for patients referred to endocrinology
For patients who were referred to endocrinology, 89% of patients were
referred to a GIC following discharge from the GIDS (see chart 2.6), 5%
of patients declined the GIDS, and 3% did not attend or engage with the
service. Other reasons for discharge included to different services,
accessed treatment privately, moved outside of the NHS England or
NHS Wales footprint, or where the discharge destination was unknown.
Chart 2.6. Patients referred to endocrinology,
discharge destination from the GIDS

35.00%
30.00%

% of patients

Detransitioned/detransitioning patients

25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
Puberty
Puberty
assessment blockers
ONLY
AND crosssex
hormones

Patient
Accessed
declined
treatment
treatment outside NHS
protocols

Intervention

Puberty
Blockers
ONLY

Treatment
withdrawn DNA

GIC

Patient declined service

DNA/Non-engagement
Accessed treatment privately

Other service (e.g. CAMHS)
Other

13

o

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Chart 3.1. Final intervention type for patients who
were not referred to endocrinology
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Intervention

Unknown/unclear

•

54.8% of patients referred to endocrinology ended up on both
puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones.
57.9% of natal females ended up on both puberty blockers
and cross-sex hormones compared to 47.7% for natal males.
24.7% of natal males ended up on puberty blockers alone
compared to 17.4% of natal females.
For patients who initially received a puberty blocker upon
referral to endocrinology, 64% went on to receive both a
puberty blocker and cross-sex hormone.
All patients who started on both a puberty blocker and crosssex hormone, remained on the same treatment upon
discharge from the GIDS.
Of the patients who only initially had a puberty assessment,
12% went on to have puberty blockers and a further 20%
went on to have both puberty blockers and cross-sex
hormones.
89% of patients were discharged to a GIC.
9% of patients declined, did not attend or engage with the
service.
<10 patients detransitioned back to their natal gender, all of
whom were female, and <10 patients were confirmed as
having received puberty blockers as their first intervention.

Chart 3.1 shows final intervention patients received upon discharge
from the GIDS. 93.0% of patients did not access any physical treatment
whilst under the GIDS. 5.0% of patients accessed treatment outside of
NHS protocols, 1.5% declined treatment and 0.5% of patients
detransitioned or were detransitioning back to their natal gender.

Detransitioned/detransiti
oning

•

Final interventions for patients not referred to endocrinology

Patient declined
treatment

Key findings

Across the 3306 patients’ audits, 2415 patients were not referred to
endocrinology by the GIDS team.

Accessed treatment
outside NHS protocols

Although first intervention and final intervention at discharge from
the GIDS was captured, the audit did not gather any information
about any interventions which the patient may have received
between these time periods.

Did not access physical
treatment

•

Theme 3. Patients not referred to endocrinology
pathway

% of patients

Limitations of analysis

14

o
Discharge destination for patients not referred to endocrinology
For patients who were not referred to endocrinology, 69% were referred
to a GIC following discharge from the GIDS (see chart 3.2), 19% of
patients declined the GIDS, and 10% did not attend or engage with the
service. Other reasons for discharge included to different services,
patient death, or where the discharge destination was unknown.

Key findings
•
•
•

93% of patients who were not referred to endocrinology did
not access any physical treatment, and 5% accessed
treatment outside of NHS protocols.
69% of patients were referred to a GIC.
29% of patients declined, did not attend or engage with the
service.

Chart 3.2. Patients not referred to endocrinology,
discharge destination from the GIDS
Other service (e.g.
CAMHS), 1.4%
DNA/Nonengagement,
9.7%

Patient declined
service, 18.7%

GIC, 68.8%

15

o

Discharge destination
Over 70% of patients were referred to a GIC following discharge from
the GIDS (see Chart 4.1). Approximately 15% of patients declined the
GIDS, and 8% did not attend (DNA) or did not engage with the service.
This was similar when comparing the discharge destination pre-Bell and
post-Bell. Other reasons for discharge included discharge to other
services, moving outside of the NHS England or NHS Wales
geographies, patient deaths or where the discharge destination was
unknown.

Chart 4.1. Patients discharge destination from GIDS
Other service
(e.g. CAMHS)

DNA/Nonengagement
Patient declined
service

Appointments with the GIDS prior to discharge
Patients received on average a total of 11 appointments with GIDS prior
to discharge, with an average of 10 appointments pre-Bell and 14
appointments post-Bell, which included any relevant endocrinology
appointments where the patient was under the care of the
endocrinology team. The distribution of appointments pre-Bell and postBell are shown in Chart 4.2.
Chart 4.2. Distribution of total number of
appointments within the GIDS prior to discharge
% of patients

Theme 4. Discharge from GIDs – all patients
summary

60.0%
40.0%
20.0%
0.0%
5 or under

Accessed treatment privately

6 to 15

16 to 25

26 to 35

36 or more

Number of appointments
Other reason

GIC

Pre-Bell (%)

Post-Bell (%)

Limitations of analysis
•

There was inconsistency in the date recorded for discharge
within the patients notes, with there being a delay in the
processing of the discharge for the patient. The CSU audit team
attempted to have consistency in the date used by utilising the
closing summary as the first reference point, however this was
not always possible where closing summaries were incomplete.

16

o

Key findings
•
•
•

70% of patients are referred to a GIC upon discharge from the
GIDS.
8% of patients did not attend/engage or declined the service
and were therefore subsequently discharged.
Patients received an average of 11 appointments with the
GIDS prior to discharge.

17

Arden & GEM CSU would like to thank colleagues at the Tavistock and Portman NHS
Foundation Trust for their support provided during the audit process.
.

18

References
Dr Hilary Cass. (2022, February). The Cass Review: Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people: Interim Report.
Retrieved from https://cass.independent-review.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Cass-Review-Interim-Report-Final-Web-Accessible.pdf

Dame Victoria Sharp P., Lord Justice Lewis, Lieven J. (2020, December). Bell v Tavistock Approved Judgement.. Retrieved from
https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Bell-v-Tavistock-Judgment.pdf

19

Appendices
Appendix 1a. Audit Template questions: Patient demographics and initial referral information
Patient ID Date of Birth

Do not
Date
enter NHS
(01/01/2023)
number

Natal gender
(sex assigned
at birth)

Male (M) or
Female (F)

Current
gender

Date of
Referral to the
GIDS

Male, Female,
Date
Non-Binary or
(01/01/2023)
other

Referral Source

Gender Identify
Development
Service (GIDS)
team

CAMHS / CYP Mental
London/Leeds/
Health, Childrens or
Birmingham/Midla
Council Service/Local
nds
Authority, GP Practice,
Bristol/ Exeter,
Paediatrics, Private
South East,South
Healthcare, School,
West, Other
Voluntary sector, Other

Lead clinician at
initial assessment

Current Lead
Clinician

Full Name

Full Name

Appendix 1b. Audit Template questions: Endocrinology referral and care pathway
Has the patient
been referred to
the endocrine
clinic

Yes or No
If No - move to
column U

If YES (Y), what was their 1st intervention?

1. ONLY Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB),
2. ONLY x-sex hormones /gender afirming
hormones (SH/GAH)
3. BOTH PB and SH/GAH (PB + SH/GAH)
4. Puberty assessment ONLY
5. Pt declined treatment
6. Other

Is patient
If YES (Y), date of If YES (Y), Number of appointments
discharged from the
referral to
patient has attended pre referral to
GIDS on referral to
endocrine?
endocrine
endocrine clinic

Date
(01/01/2023)

5
( INCLUDE: 1-2-1 appts with
clinicians, network/professional
meetings, Child Protection/Children
in Need meetings
EXCLUDE : Support meetings such as
summer groups, family days, parents
and siblings groups)

Yes or No
If No - move to
column T

20

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 1c. Audit Template questions: Discharge information and other comments
Has the patient
been discharged
for any other
reason?

Yes or No
(If No, data
capture for this
patient is
complete)

If YES (Y),
Discharge reason
on patients case
file

If YES (Y), Number of
appointments patient
has attended at GIDS
before discharge

Select drop down
(GDC, patient
declined service,
other service e.g.
CAMHS, patient
deceased, other
reason)

5
( INCLUDE : 1-2-1 appts
with clinicians,
1. ONLY Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB),
Please do not include PID
network/professional
2. ONLY x-sex hormones /gender
meetings, Child
afirming hormones (SH/GAH)
Ensure any relevant information is captured.
Protection/Children in
3. BOTH PB and SH/GAH (PB +
Date (01/01/2023)
Where you have selected 'other' in a column, please
Need meetings
SH/GAH)
indicate the specifics along with which column
EXCLUDE: Support
4. Puberty assessment ONLY
question it related to.
meetings such as
5. Pt declined hormonal treatment
summer groups, family
6. Other
e.g. Column V - patient moved abroad
days, parents and
siblings groups)

If YES (Y), Date of
discharge

Does the patient remain on the
following at the point of dicharge?

Other comments

Appendix 2. Breakdown of referral source by GIDS team
GIDS Leeds
CAMHS / CYP Mental Health
GP Practice
Children’s or Council
Service/Local Authority
Voluntary sector
School
Paediatrics
Healthcare provider - other
Healthcare provider - private
Other

GIDS
Southeast/London
50.43%
37.93%
X

GIDS
Southwest/Bristol/Exeter
53.02%
36.20%
X

Grand Total

47.34%
41.85%
X

GIDS
Midlands/Birmingham
44.44%
46.27%
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

3.09%
1.85%
1.57%
X
X
X

48.58%
40.68%
3.27%

21

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 3. Distribution of total number of appointments within the GIDS prior to referral to endocrinology, by GIDS team

120
GIDS Leeds
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham
100

GIDS South East/London

80

60

40

20

44
(b
la
nk
)

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

0
1

Number of patients

GIDS South West/Bristol/Exeter

Number of appointments

22

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 4. First intervention for patients referred to endocrinology, by GIDS team

90.00%
80.00%

GIDS Leeds
GIDS Midlands/Birmingham

70.00%

GIDS South East/London

% of patients

60.00%

GIDS South West/Bristol/Exeter

50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%

tre
at
m
en
Pu
to
be
ut
rty
si
de
bl
oc
…
ke
rs
AN
Pu
D
cr
be
os
rty
sBl
…
oc
ke
rn
ot
st
D
ar
id
te
d…
no
ta
cc
es
s
C
ro
ph
ss
ys
-s
ic
ex
al
…
ho
rm
on
es
O
N
Ac
LY
ce
ss
in
g
PB
Pu
by
be
N
H
rty
S…
bl
oc
ke
rs
(p
riv
at
el
y…

O
th
er

D
N
A

ed
Ac
ce
ss

Pu
be
rty

Bl
oc
ke
rs

O
N
LY
Pa
tie
(P
nt
B)
de
cl
in
ed
tre
Pu
at
be
m
rty
en
t
as
se
ss
m
en
tO
N
LY

0.00%

Intervention

23

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 5. First intervention following endocrinology referral by natal gender
90.00%
80.00%
70.00%

% of patients

60.00%
50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
0.00%
Puberty
Blockers ONLY
(PB)

Patient
declined
treatment

Puberty
assessment
ONLY

DNA

Puberty
Accessed
blockers AND treatment
cross-sex
outside NHS
hormones
protocols

Other

Puberty
Did not access
Blocker not
physical
started due to treatment
JR

Cross-sex
hormones
ONLY

Accessing PB
Puberty
by NHS
blockers
consultant
(privately
prior. 1st
before GIDS)
intervention AND cross-sex
from endo for hormones
CSH

Intervention
Female

Male

24

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 6. First intervention following endocrinology referral by age as percent of all patients referred
60.0%

10 or under

11-12

13-14

15-16
Intervention
Age (years)

17+

Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB)

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones

Appendix x. Final intervention type and patients’ gender (all patients referred to the GIDS)

Puberty Blocker not started due to JR

Appendix x. Final intervention upon discharge by age as the total proportion of patients referred to endocrinology

Puberty assessment ONLY

Patient declined treatment

Other

DNA

Did not access physical treatment

Cross-sex hormones ONLY

Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols

Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB)

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones

Puberty blockers (privately before GIDS) AND…

Puberty Blocker not started due to JR

Puberty assessment ONLY

Other

Accessing PB by NHS consultant prior. 1st…

Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols

Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB)

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex hormones

Puberty assessment ONLY

Patient declined treatment

Other

DNA

Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols

Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB)

Puberty assessment ONLY

Patient declined treatment

DNA

Accessed treatment outside NHS protocols

Puberty Blockers ONLY (PB)

Puberty assessment ONLY

Appendix x. Full list of final interventions

DNA

74.4%
15.0%
8.1%
1.2%
0.4%
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
Did not access physical treatment

GIC
40.0%
Patient
declined service
DNA/Non-engagement
Other service (e.g., CAMHS)
30.0% treatment privately
Accessed
Discharged to GP as reached 18 years
Patient deceased
20.0%
Professional opinion service was not right for young person
Request for self-referral/to refer at a later date
10.0%
Moved
out of NHS England/NHS Wales footprint
Discharged to GP to refer to adult services
Unknown
0.0% to explore other options
Pt wanted

Cross-sex hormones ONLY

% of patients

% of patients

50.0%
Reason

Patient declined treatment

Appendix x. Full list of reasons for discharge from the GIDS

#N/A 25

11-12
13-14
15-16
Puberty assessment ONLY

Patient declined treatment

Unknown/unclear

Treatment withdrawn - professional
advice/side effects

Treatment withdrawn - DNA

Treatment recommended but supply
issues (GP prescribing or pharmacy)

Puberty Blockers ONLY

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex
hormones (privately)

Puberty blockers AND cross-sex
hormones

Puberty Blocker not started due to JR

Intervention
Age (years)

Other

Did not access physical treatment

Detransitioned/detransitioning

Cross-sex hormones ONLY

Accessed treatment outside NHS
protocols

Treatment withdrawn - DNA

Puberty Blockers ONLY

Puberty assessment ONLY

Patient declined treatment

Accessed treatment outside NHS
protocols

Puberty Blockers ONLY

Patient declined treatment

Accessed treatment outside NHS
protocols

Accessed treatment outside NHS
protocols

% of patients

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 7. Final intervention at discharge from GIDS following endocrinology referral by age as percent of all patients referred

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

17+

26

bl
oc
ke
rs

ho
rm

Bl
oc
ke
rs

cr
os
sse
x

Pu
be
rty

AN
D

on
es

Pa
tie
O
nt
N
de
D
LY
id
cl
in
no
ed
Ac
ta
ce
tre
cc
ss
es
at
m
ed
s
en
p
tre
hy
t
si
at
ca
m
en
lt
re
to
at
ut
m
si
en
de
t
N
H
Tr
S
ea
pr
tm
ot
oc
en
ol
tw
s
ith
D
Tr
d
e
r
t
ea
ra
aw
ns
tm
n
Pu
iti
en
-D
on
be
tr
N
e
ec
A
rty
d/
om
d
Bl
et
oc
m
ra
en
ns
ke
de
iti
rn
on
d
o
ts
in
bu
g
ta
ts
r
te
up
d
pl
du
y
is
e
su
to
es
JR
(G
P
Pu
pr
be
es
cr
rty
ib
as
in
g…
se
ss
m
en
Tr
tO
ea
N
tm
LY
U
en
n
kn
tw
C
ow
ith
ro
n/
dr
Pu
s
sun
aw
be
s
cl
ex
n
rty
ea
-p
h
r
Bl
or
ro
oc
m
fe
o
ss
ke
ne
io
r(
s
na
G
O
ID
la
N
LY
S)
dv
,c
ic
e/
ro
Si
ss
de
-s
ex
ef
fe
ho
ct
rm
s
on
e
(P
riv
at
el
y)

Pu
be
rty

% of patients

Not official
Confidential – Not for wider sharing
Appendix 8. Final intervention at discharge from GIDS for patients referred to endocrinology, by natal gender

70.0%

60.0%

50.0%
Female
Male

40.0%

30.0%

20.0%

10.0%

0.0%

Intervention

27

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 9

Date:
Summer 2023
Report:
Learning points from the Gender Dysphoria Multi-Professional Review Group
(MPRG).
Provided by: Professor Judith Ellis OBE, Chair MPRG and all members of the
MPRG.
Submitted to: John Stewart
Section
A

Topic
Background

Page numbers
2

B

MPRG

2-3

C

MPRG Outcome Options

3

D

MPRG Membership

3

E

MPRG Model of work

3-4

F

MPRG Activity

4

G

Outcomes

4-5

H

GIDS, Tavistock & Portman NHSFT 5
Response

I

MPRG Reflections

5-14

J

MPRG Impact

15

K

Moving Forward

15

L

MPRG Summary learning points

15-16

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

1

A. Background:
MPRG was established in August 2021 on an interim basis following CQC and NHSE
concerns about GIDS.
CQC concerns included:
o Lack of clearly demonstrated and validated assessment tools for staff
o Lack of structured plans for care,
o Decision-making records unclear,
o Teams not always including all specialists necessary for good care,
o Informed child consent procedures not in line with NHS & GMC requirements
▪ Consistency of records on competency, capacity and consent
o Inadequate safeguarding
B. MPRG:
B. i: GIDS review
In summer 2021 a decision was taken for NHSE to establish a Multi-Professional Review
Group to decide, if assured, whether appropriate process (according to the NHSE
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)) had been followed in order for the requesting
clinician to arrive at a request to refer a child (under 16 years) for consideration of
endocrine treatment. This included assurance that:
-

-

-

the assessment and diagnosis are compliant with requirements of the Service
Specification
the child meets the eligibility criteria for referral to the endocrine clinic
there is a written record of consent by those with parental/guardian responsibility
clinicians have explained all necessary information to the parents/guardians, in a
balanced way, with opportunity for discussion, and parental/guardian concerns have
been addressed appropriately, with evidence that they have understood
there has been opportunity for parents/guardians to discuss with GIDS clinicians
without the child being present
the capacity or ability of a child’s parents/guardians to give consent has been
explored and confirmed
there is a written record of consent by the child
clinicians have explained all necessary information to the child, in an appropriate and
balanced way (tailored to developmental needs (e.g. age, ASD, ADHD, etc)), with
opportunity for discussion, and the child’s concerns have been addressed
appropriately, with evidence that they have understood
there has been opportunity for the child to discuss with GIDS clinicians without the
parents/guardians being present
the capacity or ability of the child to give consent has been explored and confirmed
child safeguarding and child protection issues have been fully considered by the
Tavistock clinicians in line with their statutory and professional duties.

B ii Endocrine Audit:
For the endocrine clinics, which were rated ‘good’ by the CQC, the MPRG
retrospectively undertook a ‘light touch’ audit of a sample of endocrine assessments
(puberty rating and baseline hormone profiles), to confirm confidence in the whole
pathway of care.

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

2

This supports assurance to Trust executives that a consistent decision-making process is
being followed.
C. MPRG Outcome Options:
There are two outcome options available to the MPRG:
•
•

agree that the appropriate process has been followed and assurance given on
all counts
agree that there is insufficient information on which to be assured on one or all
of the elements (see 2.1)

If not fully assured, the MPRG seek and the GIDS team are asked to provide, further
information. Where this is the case the MPRG via the Chair clearly outlines the information
required /action to be taken and the timeline for receipt of the additional information.
Further information supplied is considered by the Chair and if necessary, by specific or all
MPRG members, and a decision re assurance taken and communicated to GIDS.
N.B. MPRG reports an assurance that a process has been followed – it does not endorse or
refuse treatment.
D. MPRG Membership:
• Chair
• Consultant Child & Adolescent Mental Health Psychiatrist
• Senior Paediatric Nurse with Safeguarding experience
• Professor of Paediatric Endocrinology
• Consultant Paediatrician
• Consultant Psychologists x 2
• Senior Social Worker
• Youth Development Worker (In initial cases)
Management and administrative support and Secretariat are provided by the Clinical
Effectiveness, Specialised Services team at NHSE

E. MPRG Model of work:
• MPRG meet via an online meeting platform for 4 hrs each week.
• Meetings require 4 members to be quorate (Meetings have never been cancelled
due to being inquorate)
• All received documentation is redacted for family names and personal
identifiable information
• Meetings are cancelled if no cases have been submitted by the Tavistock or if the
NHSE secretariat identify that further redaction or clarification is required before
the case is presented to the MPRG for consideration
• Submissions to MPRG have for each case been between 90 to 210 pages in
length and vary in quality, from succinct to disorganised and repetitive.
• One MPRG member leads on each case but all members read and consider the
complete file.

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

3

•

•
•
•
•

Discussions are challenging and probing, remaining professional, respectful, and
sympathetic to both the children, families and professional colleagues. As the
clinical material can be distressing, the Chair and group seek to maintain
psychological safety for participants during the discussions.
Discussions/ decision documents are typed up by NHSE Admin team and direct
quotes from the documentation are used to illustrate points made.
The Chair reviews and signs off all decision documents.
All case documentation received is deleted by MPRG members after the weekly
discussion and by the Chair once the decision document is signed off.
N.B. Although in their terms of reference the MPRG are allowed to meet the
children and their families, in addition to accepting the importance of client
confidentiality and the need for members anonymity, the MPRG have never
considered that it would be appropriate or helpful to request a one-off face to
face meeting between the young people/family and unfamiliar MPRG members.
MPRG have however occasionally required GIDS staff to have additional
meetings with the child/family to provide assurance required, particularly around
assurance that the child’s voice has been heard.

F. MPRG Activity:
• Submissions received per month (average 9)

G. Outcomes:
• By July 2023 there have been 179 outcome decisions.

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

4

•

N.B. The MPRG have always met the 20-day review timeline (100%) with a mean
time of 10 days.

H. GIDS, Tavistock & Portman NHSFT Response
There have been mixed responses from the GIDS and T & P NHST leadership to the role
of the MPRG, shared directly and indirectly with NHSE and the Chair.
Some responses were of expressed relief and indicated that the MPRG process is
supportive and that an independent review is valued.
Some responses have, however, included:
• annoyance, due to the increased workload (preparing submissions)
• feeling professionally insulted and not accepting of the need for independent
professional review
• the view, sometimes directly shared with children and families, that the MPRG
process introduces an additional unnecessary and delaying step in the process of
referral to Endocrinology.
• rejecting the need to improve safeguarding practice

I. MPRG reflections
(This section provides overall reflections from the MPRG with no numerical analysis possible
as all documents are deleted immediately after a decision document is signed off by the
Chair). It is worth noting that the vast majority of documentation provided appears
disjointed and unstructured and this makes it vital for the MPRG to examine every page
submitted to ensure vital points are not overlooked.
Once documentation is received the MPRG consider the following:
1. Age:
NHSE have analysed the age of children referred to MPRG, at various stages of
the patient journey:

Age at time of
referral to GIDS

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

Youngest

Oldest

Average

4 years 1 month

12 years 5 months

8 years 5 months

5

Age at first GIDS
appointment
Age at
submission to
MPRG

Time from initial
referral to GIDS
to submission to
MPRG

5 years 1 month

14 years 6 months

9 years 9 months

12 years 0 months

15 years 9 months

14 years 3 months

Shortest

Longest

Average

3 years 1 month

9 years 1 month

5 years 6 months

1.1 The MPRG are fully aware of the difficulties and delays children and their
families experience accessing health services, the prolonged GIDS patient
journey, including time from initial referral to GIDS to a case being considered
by the MPRG. Frustration is evident in the statements received from children
and families
1.2 MPRG work as a team to try and ensure that the MPRG review does not
unduly add to their frustration. The MPRG have always met the 20-day
review timeline (100%) with a mean time of 10 days.
1.3 The MPRG have noted that assigned girls present to GIDS, and therefore to
MPRG later than assigned boys, with the start of menses often the main
contributing factor for the increase in desire for medical intervention
1.4 Where sexuality was discussed, most cases are of same sex, opposite-gender
attracted children. An increasing number of young people described
themselves as ‘straight’ or ‘not trans’, just a boy/girl.
1.5 All cases referred had met or surpassed the 6 GIDS sessions required in the
SOP and in many cases children and families had been seen far more
frequently.
1.6 What has not been clearly evidenced is how thoroughly ‘gender identity and
consideration of different options for gender expression’ and ‘different
treatment options/choices’ (SOP) were explored.
1.7 MPRG also have a concern that the period between referral and first
appointment at GIDS (early-stage delay), has resulted in children and parents
having already adopted an affirmative approach. In all but one case, social
transition had commenced or completed. There is inconsistent evidence of
the individual impact of social transition being explore with children and their
families with GIDS tending to affirm the presenting social transition.
Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

6

1.8 It appears to MPRG from the submissions, that in most cases children and
parents were asking to progress on to puberty blockers from the very first
appointment with GIDS (see section 3).
2. Physical Medical history:
The GIDS notes supplied to the MPRG rarely provide a structured history or
physical assessment, however the submissions to the MPRG suggest that the
children have a wide range of childhood, familial and congenital conditions.
MPRG has not identified prevalence of specific physical diagnoses in the
cohort, including differences in sex development (DSD).
2.1 In a small number of cases parents/ guardians were notably disappointed
when an ‘intersex’ (DSD) diagnosis was not applicable to the child.
3. Gender journey
3.1 Assigned and current gender are identified to the MPRG.
3.2 It is noted by the MPRG that although the Cass interim report shows a large
increase in assigned female to male cases this has not been reflected in the
cases referred to the MPRG, which remain predominantly assigned male to
female cases (NHSE analysis: From August 2021 to April 2023 MPRG had
considered 49 Assigned Female cases and 117 Assigned Male cases).
3.3 Information about the child’s gender journey is provided by GIDS and it is
notable that until the child and family’s first appointment at GIDS they have
received little, if any, support from health, social care, or education
professionals. Most children and parents have felt isolated and desperate for
support and have therefore turned for information to the media and online
resources, with many accessing LGBTQ+ and GD support groups or private
providers which appear to be mainly affirmative in nature and children and
families have moved forward with social transition.
3.4 Evidence of adequate exploration of gender identity journey is, therefore,
difficult to assure as prior to MPRG consideration, many children have
already fully socially transitioned. Most children have changed their names by
deed-poll, attend school in their chosen gender and some have changed NHS
numbers and passports. (See section 1.4). This history/journey is rarely
examined closely by GIDS for signs of difficulty, regret or wishes to alter any
aspect of the child’s gender journey trajectory.
3.5 Using the documents presented by GIDS to the MPRG it is difficult to assess
whether GIDS clinicians have taken an exclusively affirmative stance with the
child and family.
3.6 Although a diagnosis of gender dysphoria DSM-5 (children with consideration
of adolescent and adults criteria for older children) is required by the SOP,
the MPRG acknowledges that the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for gender

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

7

dysphoria has a low threshold based on overlapping criteria , and is likely to
create false positives, i.e. young people who do not go on to have an
enduring cross-sex gender identity may have met the criteria in childhood
and early – mid childhood social transition may be influential in maintaining
adherence to the criteria. Sex role and gender expression stereotyping is
present within the diagnostic criteria e.g., preferred toys, clothes etc., not
reflecting that many toys, games and activities for children and young people
are less exclusively gendered than in previous decades. Retrospective
assessment of distress and poor social functioning in a child or young person
is fraught with difficulty.
3.7 As stated in 1.4 and 3.4 in the cases considered by the MPRG social transition
has occurred. The MPRG is concerned that some children are continuing to
live in stealth, with a common, genuine fear of “being found out”, suffering
rejection either due to having not taking friends in to their confidence (with
holding personal information regarding biological sex or specific sex based
experiences ), or due to trans-prejudice or phobia. . MPRG observe that
living in stealth appears to increase a child’s level of stress and anxiety with
resultant behaviour and mental health problems, including social withdrawal,
with children becoming increasingly isolated, including resorting to homeschooling or tutoring, with some distressing descriptions of children rarely
leaving their house.
3.8 MPRG have noted both excellent examples of good practice by families and
schools in supporting children as they socially transitioned and some
worrying examples of unhelpful practices and restrictions.
4. Mental Health:
4.1 Some of the children have had contact with CAMHS at some stage on their
GD journey or are on a long waiting list for a CAMHS review (mention of 2-6
year waiting times). In most cases once GIDS were engaged in care, CAMHS
were no longer involved. However, MPRG note some examples of great
quality collaborative parallel working with CAMHS, school-based therapists or
private counsellors.
4.2 The most prevalent mental health issues appear to be social anxiety and the
threat of self-harm (including children threatening to cut off their penis), with
many families reporting actual self-harm behaviour and injuries having
occurred (e.g. eating disorders, cutting, etc.).
4.3 A considerable number of children appear to express suicidal thoughts,
particularly at the first signs of puberty, but there has been limited evidence
in the MPRG cases of suicidal behaviour.
5. Neurodevelopmental:
5.1 In the majority of cases considered by the MPRG, there is mention of possible
ASD or ADHD traits or diagnoses.

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

8

5.2 Confirmation of appropriate and complete assessment is rarely available, and
there remains some confusion as to how or whether formal diagnosis has
been made and whether formal assessments have used sex or gender related
psychometric tools to assess children with gender dysphoria and
neurodevelopmental concerns. For example, the continuous performance
test (Qb) used as part of the ADHD assessment has a sample of children
identified at birth as male and a sample identified at birth as female. While
the correct use of pronouns and names is key, this is a computer-based
programme which does not provide a sample of children with gender
dysphoria.
5.3 There appears to be a prolonged waiting time from identification of
neurodivergent traits to formal assessment (2- 4 years).
5.4 It is of most concern that where a neurodevelopmental disorder is suspected,
but not confirmed because a formalised assessment is not available, there is
often limited evidence of GIDS professionals ensuring that options and care
has been explained to ensure the child’s understanding so that valid consent
can be obtained. There was often insufficient evidence of how GIDS make
decisions made about the use of appropriate assessment tools for children
with additional needs.
6. Psychosocial
6.1 No genograms / family trees were made available and it was difficult to
ascertain family structure and relationships from the documentation provided
due to redaction.
6.2 The psychosocial background of the children considered by MPRG was rarely
uncomplicated and usually complex. MPRG were frequently concerned about
the lack of evidence of professional curiosity as to how a child’s specific social
circumstances may be impacting on their Gender Dysphoria journey and
decisions, for example; physical or mental illness within the family, abusive or
addictive environments, bereavement, cultural or religious background, etc..
6.3 The children in many of the cases reviewed by the MPRG were residing with
one parent but in most cases, there was shared parental responsibility and
GIDS had made marked effort to engage with both parents.
6.4 MPRG members considered the impact that each child’s home psychosocial
situation may have been having on their gender journey, for example, their
exploration of options, affirmative or transphobic beliefs and experiences and
any possible coercion, family to child or child to family.
6.5 MPRG found it extremely useful to receive external organisation reports, for
example from a child’s school, that gave some indication of a child’s social
and psychological state e.g. peer group interactions and relationships and

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

9

acceptance, expression of gender identity and wellbeing, school attendance,
academic achievement. Furthermore, there were frequent occasions where
school reports were significantly out of date.
6.6 MPRG were particularly concerned and interested to understand why a child
might be living in stealth and/or was socially isolated, for example being
home schooled, taking into account the difficulties enhanced by Covid
restrictions. The evidence provided by GIDS frequently failed to provide
adequate explanation.
7 Multi-professional Teams
7.1 The Multi-professional nature of the MPRG is a definite benefit with all professionals
approaching consideration of the same case from a particular expert standpoint,
with constructive challenge from interested and supportive colleagues leading to
comprehensive clarity in overall MPRG decision making.
7.2 The Pre MDCR meetings introduced by GIDS over the last year has gone some way
to provide this multi-professional consideration of cases and notes from this meeting
often identify the same concerns as are raised by the MPRG. The meeting notes from
MCDR frequently show that questions or actions were raised, but it is very rare that
evidence of answers or resolution of the action is documented.
7.3 It was rare to see appropriate referral of cases for consideration at Complex Case
Panels and where this occurred the multi-professional membership, conclusions and
actions were unclear.
7.4 A recurrent problem noted by the MPRG was the lack of routine endocrinology
involvement during the GIDS process.
7.4.1 A paediatric endocrinologist would have been able to ascertain whether the
child has entered puberty and if the Tanner stage reached met the SOP
requirement for referral to endocrinology.
In most cases puberty staging depended upon child and family reported
changes being interpreted by professionals with no endocrine training.
Essentially, the GIDS team was undertaking the layperson’s approach to when
puberty starts. In summary: Male puberty was based on voice ‘breaking’ (in
reality this occurs between Tanner stages 3-4), some hair ‘down below’,
spontaneous erections described by a variety of terminology, squaring of the
shoulders, some facial hair growth, height growth spurt. A key early sign of
the onset of male puberty is the increase in testis volume from 3ml to 4ml.
Clearly this can only be confirmed by examination. Female puberty was
based on ‘chest development’, aka breast development which an early sign of
puberty in girls (equivalent to the testis volume sign in boys). However, the
‘chest development’ may not represent true breast enlargement but be due
to fatty tissue from obesity. Hair ‘down below’ is akin to pubic hair growth.
The definitive marker of puberty well advanced in girls is the onset of menses.
This is a late event female puberty, occurring after the growth spurt and
equivalent to Tanner stage 4. There is no equivalent in boys, although

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

10

nocturnal ‘wet dreams’ would be approximately the same puberty state i.e.,
late, and well beyond the Tanner 2 stage.
The GIDS members were also involved in counselling about
puberty blockers work, their potential side effects, and the need to be
judicious in their use in assigned males in order to optimise penile growth to
use for subsequent genitoplasty. The team was also involved in detailed
discussions about future fertility and technical aspects of gamete
preservation.
7.4.2 A recurrent concern for the MPRG was the inadequacy and on occasions
inaccuracy of answers given to children and their families by GIDS and their
failure to correct child and parental misconceptions about puberty, puberty
blockers and hormones. These misconceptions were often evident in the
Child and parental statements made at the end of the period of assessment
after which the GIDS service had deemed the child appropriate for referral
for physical intervention. Examples included:
a. Failing to explain that puberty blocker use in GD cases is
unlicensed and off label
b. Correcting parents when they quoted use in GD to be the same
as licensed use in precocious puberty
c. Covering known side effects but minimising that a lot is still
unknown about short- and long-term side effects,
d. Discussing the permanent and reversible impact of puberty
blockers on fertility,
e. Not sharing figures around how many children who start
puberty blockers go on to hormone treatment.
f. Rarely is a possible pause or slowing of psychosocial
development discussed in relation to the use of puberty
blockers.
7.5 MPRG were always provided with a copy of a completed Hormone Blocker Checklist
and a Hormone Blocker Referral consent form signed by the child, parent/guardian
and GIDS clinician. It was noted that although counterintuitive in most cases the
checklist was completed after the consent form.
It would have been far more reassuring if in all cases an endocrinologist had been
involved in the completion of this checklist, and early involvement of an
endocrinologist would streamline the patient journey as currently after referral a
further checklist is completed and a further consent for treatment form is signed by
the child and parents and the prescribing endocrinologist. An endocrinologist as a
member of the GIDS multi-professional team could ensure informed consent in
relation to puberty blockers as well as assuring themselves as the prescriber, of the
gender dysphoria diagnosis.
8 Private Puberty Blockers (PPB)
8.1 An increasing concern for the MPRG is the number of children who have
commenced private puberty blockers (PPB).

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

11

8.2 Private providers do not follow the prescribing, administration and
investigation/ monitoring protocols agreed and followed by the NHS.
8.3 It is apparent that children and parents seek this option due to their
frustration with NHS delays and that parents believe that they are acting in
the ‘best interest’ of their child.
8.4 When the MPRG was established in 2021 the GIDS team negated their
responsibility to discuss any clinical concerns about private treatment with
children and families but have since accepted their responsibility as stated in
the SOP to discourage families from accessing treatment that is not being
delivered according to NHS protocols. GPs have also been advised against
prescribing these unlicensed, off label drugs and PPB’s are more likely to be
delivered by post from overseas.
8.5 As children and families face the increasing worry of further delay due to
changes to GIDS provision, MPRG are now having cases presented where
parents have, or are threatening to commence PPB’s even though the
treatment is not as identified in NHS protocols, the families have received no
information about side effects or the impact on fertility, and no or limited
baseline tests (e.g. bloods, dexa scan) have been done. It is suspected that
this is an attempt by parents/guardians to put pressure on the MPRG and
NHS that for the child’s safety they should be immediately referred for NHS
treatment. This safety argument is particularly challenging in cases where
PPB’s were commenced with temporary charity funding which has now been
withdrawn, and the cessation of treatment that the child believes is helping
would potentially cause the child significant distress.
9 Consent
9.1 MPRG confirm that consent for referral to endocrinology has been signed and
dated by the child, parent/guardian and clinician and generally this has been easy
to locate in the documentation, with the MPRG required to accept redacted
signatures are the child’s and the signature of the parent/s/guardian/s who hold
parental responsibility, and the unknown professional’s signature.
9.2 For assurance the MPRG consider all information provided to confirm that:
Clinicians have explained all necessary information, giving opportunities for
discussion, confirming understanding, and that concerns have been
addressed appropriately including:
➢ Exploration/ consideration gender identity/ expression and treatment
options
➢ Purpose and nature PBs: advantages and disadvantages
➢ Evolving research and understanding of the known implications and
short and long term consequences of treatment’ PLUS many
unknowns.
➢ Fertility treatment options
➢ 98% expectation progress to hormone treatment, surgery, etc
9.2.1 For children, clinicians are required to explain the information in an
appropriate and balanced way, tailored to the child’s
developmental needs, which includes neurodevelopmental needs.
Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

12

This was an area carefully considered by the MPRG and although
the range of approaches to explain information and to confirm
understanding directly used by GIDS in sessions has generally been
impressive, in a number of cases additional information was
requested by the MPRG.
9.2.2 As described in 1.4 and 3.4 due to the delay in access to GIDS, and
the affirmative stance already evident at first appointments, the
MPRG carefully sought evidence of consideration of gender identity
and treatment options.
9.2.3 Fertility treatment options were generally well covered, with
appropriate consideration of age-related decision making but by
non-specialists in this area. However, the discussion of childhood
interruption of the development of organs that reach mature
function in adulthood is rarely evidenced.
9.2.4 Advantages and disadvantages of PB’s were generally covered but
the MPRG often requested further confirmation that evolving
research, unknown consequences and the 98% expectation of
progress to hormone treatment had been adequately discussed and
understood.
9.2.5 As stated in 7.4 there was concern from MPRG that the absence of
endocrinology input did raise concerns about adequacy of some of
the information given and handling of questions and the addressing
of concerns before the signing of the consent for referral form
although it is acknowledged that a further consent form is signed
once a child is under endocrinology and this consent is audited as
part of the MPRG light touch endocrine audit
9.3 The MPRG looked for confirmation of the child and parent/guardian’s capacity
and ability to consent, that the parents/guardians and children:
➢ Understood and retained relevant information long enough to make a
decision
➢ Used the information as part of the process of making a decision
➢ Were able to communicate decision to others
➢ And that there was no evidence of coaching /coercion of parents/child
9.3.1 MPRG were mainly reliant on the GIDS clinicians’ assessment of the
parent guardians’ capacity and ability to consent.
9.3.2 Written statements from parents were provided. Many were moving
and helpful, but some were used by parents to praise GIDS staff and to
complain about the MPRG process. Many betrayed grave
misunderstandings of the nature of gender dysphoria and the outcome of
physical treatments.
9.3.3 MPRG occasionally had concerns that parents were being encouraged
to move forward to consent by others, but this was difficult to confirm.
9.3.4 There were occasional cases where the parents appeared to be
fearful of what they anticipated might be their child’s response if they did
not consent, (for example child threats of self-harm, suicide, or aggressive
behaviour). On these occasions the MPRG carefully considered the notes of
meetings when parents were seen alone.
9.3.5 MPRG were provided with an impressive array of resources to
demonstrate the children’s understanding and exploration of information
including verbatim transcripts of discussion with children. While noting that
Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

13

clinical practice evolves over time and many of the cases presented were
seen over an extended period, MPRG were sometimes surprised to see the
marked differences in approach and clinician choice of assessment and
information giving materials.
9.3.6 In an attempt to hear the child’s voice children were asked to write a
short statement for MPRG. A few were extremely helpful and informative,
but most were extremely brief and unhelpful and on occasions there was
suspicious concern due to the language used that they had been
rehearsed, written, or dictated by others. Often they included worrying
misunderstanding of the outcome of physical interventions.
9.3.7 School reports, when thoughtfully completed were extremely useful
in confirming whether the child had capacity and ability to consent.
9.3.8 If the MPRG were unconvinced that they were hearing the child’s
voice, or if there was concern that there may be coercion from others, the
notes from the meetings when the child had been seen alone were
carefully considered and on a number of occasions, especially if the child
had not been seen alone for some time (e.g. for over a year), the GIDS
team were requested by MPRG to organise a 1:1 review and update with
the child and resubmit notes from this meeting to the MPRG.
10 Safeguarding & Child protection
When the MPRG began reviewing cases the Tavistock team were unwilling to comply
with MPRG safeguarding reporting requirements, but this situation has been partially
resolved.
10.1 The MPRG now see Confirmation from Social Services as to whether at the
point of referral to the endocrine clinic the child is the subject of a statutory
order e.g. a current Child Protection Plan or a Child in Need Plan.
10.2 A Tavistock Risk and Safeguarding assessment form is included in
documentation received by the MPRG which is meant to indicate if GIDS are
aware of any non-statutory safeguarding concerns including any that have
been raised by any health, education, police or social care professionals
involved in the child’s care.
Although very occasionally a TRSA form is continuously and comprehensively
completed, in most cases it has been completed just before the submission is
sent to the MPRG and is incomplete when considered alongside issues noted
by the MPRG whilst reviewing documentation received. Examples of issues
identified by the MPRG include increased psychosocial vulnerability (including
complex family relationships/situations/illness/addiction/domestic abuse),
transphobic bullying, online abuse/ grooming, isolation, self-harm, suicidality,
etc.)
Incomplete forms are returned to GIDS for reconsideration and resubmission.
10.3 MPRG continue to be very concerned about the GIDS teams lack of apparent
professional curiosity or concern in relation to risk and safeguarding.

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

14

J. MPRG Impact
Positives:
➢ When established it was estimated that around 4,000 cases were being prepared by
Tavistock GIDS for referral to the endocrine service. The MPRG have only received
around 180 cases for review, and it is likely that these were cases that the GIDS team
considered ready for referral. As shown in section G MPRG were not assured on all
counts in 42 of these cases and additional information and action was requested
prior to reconsideration. 2 of the 42 cases were withdrawn, 5 are still awaiting
resubmission but in the remaining cases further information provided was found to
be sufficient to provide assurance on all counts, allowing referral to endocrinology.
The figure unknown to MPRG is the number of the remaining 3,820 cases originally
stated to be in the system were not submitted to the MPRG due to MPRG
requirements for assurance.
➢ Safeguarding practice has been transformed and strengthened.
➢ Vast amount of learning to inform Cass Review and support establishment of new
centers
Perceived negatives:
➢ Further perceived delay due to MPRG process (NB MPRG achieved 100% compliance
with NHSE agreed timeline)
➢ GIDS clinicians spending time preparing documentation for the MPRG, time that
could have been spent with patients
➢ NHSE budget required for MPRG activity
(These were all unavoidable as required to deliver the NHSE brief)
K. Moving forward
The MPRG assure GIDS compliance with the SOP in place in 2021. When a new SOP and
Service Specification are agreed and new services are established MPRG will be stood down.
MPRG members envisage that the service provider’s internal governance structures will
have the oversight and be responsible for monitoring the quality and functioning of the
service against the new service specifications standards and KPI’s, with the opportunity for
internal and cross-provider safe, respectful and supportive peer review.
The MPRG team members could be called upon to provide a supportive, advisory role as
new services are developed and stabilised.
L. MPRG summary learning points:
a. Essential need for early outreach, including possible direct and indirect
support to parents with flexible support for the gender dysphoric child
b. Develop first point of access support to help explore gender identity and
consideration of different options for gender expression’.
c. Improve on DSM-5 diagnostic criteria Acknowledgement that a child
meeting diagnostic criteria (DSMV or ICD 11) may reject a cross sex gender
identity in later years
d. Need A full psychosocial assessment

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

15

e. Need to increase the availability of ASD or ADHD assessments appropriate
for age and gender identity, and for the powerful platform developed in
this process to be used to ensure that wording and tools can fit all gender
and sexual identities.
f. Prioritise hearing child’s voice with facility for a developing supportive
conversation as the child learns about the complexities of cross-sex gender
expression
g. Liaise with schools, directing them to information and offer consultation/
support to staff
h. Adequate safeguarding and risk management
i. Each professional act within their area of expertise
j. Endocrinologist part of GIDS MDT
k. Different treatment option/choices explored ’including the advantages and
disadvantages of treatments, risks and complications of management
options including medical intervention. .
l. Ensure the child, parents and guardians understand Information on the
purpose, nature and physical consequences of puberty blockers (e.g.,
menopause, osteoporosis and impact on fertility) including consideration of
unknowns (to include for example: wellness during period without sex
hormones, sexual function, fertility, Psychosocial development and cognitive
function), ‘evolving research and understanding of the implications and
long-term physical consequences of treatment’, and that 98% of children
would progress to taking sex hormones.
m. parents/guardians should periodically meet GIDS clinicians without the
child being present’
n. child should periodically meet with GIDS clinicians without the
parents/guardians being present’
o. the capacity or ability of child and parents/guardians to give consent are
adequately explored
p. Standard Operating Procedures should be agreed and implemented, clearly
outlining the decision-making process / pathways that need to be followed
to lead to a referral decision, with built in check points.
q. A structured decision-making framework should be followed and
documented when considering each case

Final Copy MPRG August 10th 2023

16

Appendix 9

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 10

Appendix 10

Diagnostic criteria
for gender dysphoria
DSM-5-TR diagnostic criteria
for gender dysphoria

As with the diagnostic criteria for adolescents
and adults, the condition must also be
associated with clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.

Gender Dysphoria in Children

Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and
Adults

The DSM-5-TR defines gender dysphoria in
children as a marked incongruence between
one’s experienced/expressed gender and
assigned gender, lasting at least 6 months,
as manifested by at least six of the following
(one of which must be the first criterion):

The DSM-5-TR defines gender dysphoria
in adolescents and adults as a marked
incongruence between one’s experienced/
expressed gender and their assigned gender,
lasting at least 6 months, as manifested by at
least two of the following:

• A strong desire to be of the other gender or
an insistence that one is the other gender
(or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned gender)
• In boys (assigned gender), a strong
preference for cross-dressing or simulating
female attire; or in girls (assigned gender),
a strong preference for wearing only typical
masculine clothing and a strong resistance
to the wearing of typical feminine clothing

• A marked incongruence between one’s
experienced/expressed gender and primary
and/or secondary sex characteristics (or
in young adolescents, the anticipated
secondary sex characteristics)

• A strong preference for cross-gender roles
in make-believe play or fantasy play

• A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary
and/or secondary sex characteristics
because of a marked incongruence with
one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in
young adolescents, a desire to prevent the
development of the anticipated secondary
sex characteristics)

• A strong preference for the toys, games or
activities stereotypically used or engaged in
by the other gender

• A strong desire for the primary and/or
secondary sex characteristics of the other
gender

• A strong preference for playmates of the
other gender

• A strong desire to be of the other gender (or
some alternative gender different from one’s
assigned gender)

• In boys (assigned gender), a strong
rejection of typically masculine toys, games,
and activities and a strong avoidance of
rough-and-tumble play; or in girls (assigned
gender), a strong rejection of typically
feminine toys, games, and activities
• A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy
• A strong desire for the physical sex
characteristics that match one’s
experienced gender

• A strong desire to be treated as the other
gender (or some alternative gender different
from one’s assigned gender)
• A strong conviction that one has the typical
feelings and reactions of the other gender
(or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned gender)

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

In order to meet criteria for the diagnosis,
the condition must also be associated with
clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.

ICD-11: HA60 Gender
incongruence of adolescence or
adulthood
Gender Incongruence of Adolescence and
Adulthood is characterised by a marked and
persistent incongruence between an individual´s
experienced gender and the assigned sex,
which often leads to a desire to ‘transition’, in
order to live and be accepted as a person of
the experienced gender, through hormonal
treatment, surgery or other health care services
to make the individual´s body align, as much
as desired and to the extent possible, with the
experienced gender. The diagnosis cannot be
assigned prior the onset of puberty. Gender
variant behaviour and preferences alone are not
a basis for assigning the diagnosis.
Exclusions:
Paraphilic disorders. Independent review of
gender identity services for children and young
people

ICD-11: HA61 Gender
incongruence of childhood
Gender incongruence of childhood is
characterised by a marked incongruence
between an individual’s experienced/ expressed
gender and the assigned sex in pre-pubertal
children. It includes a strong desire to be a
different gender than the assigned sex; a
strong dislike on the child’s part of his or her
sexual anatomy or anticipated secondary sex
characteristics and/or a strong desire for the
primary and/ or anticipated secondary sex
characteristics that match the experienced
gender; and make-believe or fantasy play, toys,
games, or activities and playmates that are
typical of the experienced gender rather than
the assigned sex. The incongruence must have
persisted for about 2 years. Gender variant
behaviour and preferences alone are not a basis
for assigning the diagnosis.
Exclusions:
Paraphilic disorders.

Appendix 10

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 11

To:

Dr Hilary Cass

By Email

NHS England
Wellington House
133-155 Waterloo Road
London
SE1 8UG
17 January 2024

Dear Hilary
INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF GENDER IDENTITY SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND
YOUNG PEOPLE – QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH PROGRAMME
With the Review now entering its final stages, I wanted to confirm an approach for handing
over to NHS England certain aspects of the Review’s research programme which will need
to continue beyond delivery of your final report.
The Review’s interim report highlighted that one of the challenges with understanding how
best to improve NHS services for this group of children and young people is the lack of high
quality data. A good example is that little is known about the medium and longer-term
outcomes for children and young people who were seen by the Gender Identity Development
Service (GIDS) at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust.
The Review’s quantitative research programme, led by the University of York, aimed to
improve the evidence and provide a better understanding of the treatment approaches for
this population of children and young people. The research aimed to do this by tracking the
journeys of young people who were seen by GIDS into NHS adult gender dysphoria clinics
and the wider health system, to provide a population-level evidence base of the different
pathways.
The Secretary of State for Health and Social Care granted an order under s22(5) of the
Gender Recognition Act to enable data to be disclosed for a time-limited period for the sole
purpose of the study. Like all NHS research, the study was subject to strict ethical and legal
controls with an ‘opt out’ option for individuals who did not wish to have their data used as
part of the study.
NHS England was fully supportive of the proposed approach; and the research received full
approval from the Health Research Authority.
As you know, the study relied upon the seven NHS trusts in England that host adult Gender
Dysphoria Clinics and the GIDS fully cooperating with the University of York in support of the
research and NHS England wrote to the Chief Executives and Medical Directors of those
organisations accordingly. Regrettably, it is now clear that despite the best efforts of the
research team, the necessary cooperation from the clinical leads within those services has

not been forthcoming, and consequently the University of York has advised that as things
currently stand, it is not appropriate to yet begin the next stage of the study.
This is clearly very disappointing and if left this way would represent a missed opportunity for
the NHS to lead the way internationally in gathering high quality evidence that can, for the
first time, present a better understanding of the longer-term outcomes for individuals who
have received clinical or medical intervention for gender dysphoria / gender incongruence in
childhood or adolescence.
I am sure you will agree that the NHS should not lose the opportunity to make further use of
the statutory instrument that was passed by Parliament, which enables the collection of the
data for use in an approved research study until 2027. As such, I am writing to confirm that
NHS England will take over responsibility for realising the ambitions of the study and the
NHS National Research Oversight Board for Children and Young People’s Gender Services,
chaired by Professor Sir Simon Wessely, is well placed to support us in this task. In your
letter of 31st January 2023 you flagged that there would be a need for continued oversight of
this work beyond the life of the Review, so I hope this approach reassures you that this
aspect of the Review’s work will not be lost.
As part of the handover process, I would be grateful if you could carefully document the work
completed so far, including the circumstances that led the University of York to reach the
conclusion that it was not yet possible to move ahead with the next stages of the research
study. I would also welcome any specific recommendations you might wish to make for NHS
England’s consideration as we look to regain momentum with this important study.
I want to thank you for your vitally important ongoing work in improving services for this
group of children and young people, and I look forward to receiving your final advice early in
2024.
Yours sincerely

John Stewart
National Director, Specialised Commissioning

Copyright © NHS England 2024

2

Appendix 11

This page is intentionally left blank

Independent review of gender identity services for children and young people

Appendix 12

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair
Review of GIDS for Children and Young People

John Stewart
National Director
Specialised Commissioning
NHS England and NHS Improvement
Sent by email
20 March 2024
Dear John
INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF GENDER IDENTITY SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG
PEOPLE – QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH PROGRAMME
I am writing in response to your letter of 17 January regarding the Review’s commissioned
quantitative research programme, advising that, despite your welcomed efforts to obtain
cooperation, most of the NHS gender clinics have refused to take part in this research.
It has not been at all straightforward trying to get this research off the ground. It has
absorbed a considerable amount of time and attention from the Review and the researchers
at the University of York, as well as from NHS England and the Department of Health and
Social Care, all of which has delayed our work.
The study follows usual NHS research practice, it is only novel because of the sensitivity of
the subject matter and the issue of changing NHS Numbers, which was overcome by the
Statutory Instrument. It is therefore hugely disappointing that the NHS gender services have
decided not to participate with this research. I am frustrated on behalf of the young people
and their families that the opportunity to reduce some of the uncertainties around care
options has not been taken.
Ultimately, the NHS is an evidence-based service with a responsibility to maintain the safety
of those in its care. Understanding more about what support people who attended the
Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS) received, and whether this helped them, will
provide vital evidence to assist young people, their families, and the clinicians working with
them to make informed decisions about the right pathway for them. As a single integrated

health service, which for the period in question had one provider of care for children and
young people, this was a world leading opportunity to look at outcomes for c.9000 young
adults and add to the evidence base.
We had hoped to have some early findings to inform the Review. However, as outlined in
my letter to you of 31 January 2023, it had become evident that the full outputs from the
study, including resulting peer-reviewed papers, would not be available in time to be
published alongside my final report.
I asked that NHS England give consideration as to how the ambitions of this study could be
realised beyond the life of the Review. I am grateful for your confirmation that the National
Research Oversight Board will support this going forward.
To assist the Oversight Board, I attach detail on the circumstances that led the University of
York to reach the conclusion that it was not yet possible to move ahead with the next stages
of the research study (Annex A).
I look forward to submitting my final report and recommendations in the coming weeks. In
the meantime, my recommendations on this specific issue are that NHS England:
1. Work with the University of York to take forward phase one of the data linkage study
without delay.
2. Work with Department of Health and Social Care to mandate the data exchange
from the clinics to facilitate this.
3. Undertake a case note audit of record keeping in the adult clinics to assess the
feasibility of phase 2 of the data linkage study.
Yours sincerely

Dr Hilary Cass
Chair, Independent Review into Gender Identity Services for Children and Young People

Annex A - Data linkage study: Assessment, Management and Outcomes for
children and young people referred to a National Gender Identity
Development Service
1.1.

Little is known about what happens to the children and young people who have accessed
the Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS) in relation to the support and
interventions they have received and their outcomes.

1.2.

Whilst a considerable amount of research has been published in this field, systematic
reviews conducted for this Review and internationally have demonstrated the poor quality
of the published studies, meaning there is not a reliable evidence base upon which to base
clinical decisions.

1.3.

The Review has tried to plug this gap through its commissioned research programme,
which included an ambitious data linkage study. The study approach was proposed by the
University of York as part of its response to a national open procurement process.

1.4.

The research study plans to use existing data held by the NHS - including data from GIDS,
hospital wards, outpatient clinics, emergency departments and adult Gender Dysphoria
Clinics (GDCs) - to track the journeys of all young people (approximately 9,000) referred to
the GIDS service through the system to provide a population-level evidence base of the
different pathways people take and different outcomes people experience.

1.5.

This study aims to improve the level and quality of evidence on the treatment and care of
this population of children and young people:
•
•
•

enabling the Review and the NHS to have a better understanding of the best treatment
approaches for this population of children and young people;
ensuring clinicians had the best possible evidence when providing care; and
supporting children and young people and their parents/carers in making better
informed decisions.

1.6.

This research study offers a real opportunity to contribute to the international evidence
base for this service area as it would access what is thought to be the single largest data
set available for the presenting population.

1.7.

Healthcare data on populations of children, young people and adults are routinely used to
determine outcomes of care for the purpose of improving NHS services. This has not been
the case for gender questioning children and young people – the aim is that this research
would go some way to address this imbalance.

1.8.

As with the other studies, the study protocol was subject to Research Ethics Committee
(REC) and Confidentiality Advisory Group (CAG) processes prior to achieving full Health
Research Authority (HRA) approval. These approvals were required before the study could
commence.

1.9.

It took over a year to gain the necessary approvals from the Health Research Authority’s
Research Ethics Committee and Confidentiality Advisory Group. While the methodology
proposed for the research is not particularly unusual, the robust scrutiny and consideration
the committees applied to the study was entirely appropriate given the sensitivity of the
subject matter.

1.10.

The approach to governance, data protection and confidentiality was consistent with other
research undertaken by the NHS or when using NHS data. In addition, the research team
was careful to ensure compliance with any special rules and sensitivities that may apply to
information about transgender people, including those with Gender Recognition
Certificates (GRCs), as in some cases the individuals whose data would have formed part of
the research would have obtained a GRC.

1.11.

The Gender Recognition Act (GRA) creates an offence of unlawfully disclosing information
about individuals who have obtained a GRC. To ensure an offence could not be
inadvertently committed, a ‘statutory instrument’ was passed through Parliament,
permitting the handling of information about people with GRC for the very limited purpose
of this research. This was required before REC and CAG would consider the research
protocol, and before NHS England and the NHS Data and Analytics team would support the
research.

1.12.

While the Statutory Instrument took some time to pass, and the public reporting of this
caused some concern among the trans and gender diverse community, it was important to
do this so that as full a picture as possible was established through the study, and the data
of people, who potentially have some of the most successful outcomes, was not
automatically excluded.

1.13.

In addition, the ethics approval process required the researchers to seek the views of those
affected to show that there was a need for the study and that patients were content with
the planned approach.

1.14.

The PPI sessions found that, while some participants were initially sceptical about the
research based on what they had heard in the press or on social media, when the study
was explained the majority understood the approach, the reason for the research and how
their data would be used. Some participants were surprised that outcomes were not
routinely collected and measured, and there was generally a high level of support for the
research.

1.15.

Another important consideration was the need to provide the opportunity to opt out for
those that did not wish for their data to be included. Because the University of York
needed to look at a large number of records, it was not feasible to get individual consent.
Instead, individuals not wishing to take part in the study would have been able to opt out
via their clinical team, based at GIDS or one of the seven adult NHS Gender Dysphoria
Clinics (GDCs). The opt out period was to be the first step in the study, to be followed by a
standard secure transfer of basic demographic data.

1.16.

Despite the rigor applied in meeting HRA requirements, the University of York received
significant opposition from all but one of the adult GDCs including refusal to facilitate the
initial opt out stage of the study. The concerns cited by the adult GDCs included:
• ethical considerations, which had already been considered and met through the
stringent and lengthy HRA process to achieve the relevant approvals;
• availability of/access to data, although the initial stage of the study asked for basic
demographic data, which would not be an unusual request for NHS research and raises
questions in relation to GDC record management; and
• resource impacts, even though the GDCs are contractually required to take part in
research and appropriate costs would have been met by NHS England.

1.17.

This was disappointing as at an early stage of protocol development, the research team
had met with representatives from three of the clinics to discuss the proposed approach.

1.18.

Additionally, prior to final REC and CAG approval, a workshop was held with the adult
gender clinics to talk through the study, data requirements and technical aspects and to
identify any logistical challenges, where some concerns were highlighted. Following the
workshop, the University of York met with the clinics to discuss the issues raised.

1.19.

It was agreed to phase the project, building in feasibility steps, which would be overseen
by a further National Institute for Heath and Care Research (NIHR) independent panel.
Additionally, NHS England was willing to discuss resource implications to address provider
concerns about the potential impact on clinical services.

1.20.

The team had developed the patient notifications and communications resources to
explain the research and provide information about how to opt-out of the study should an
individual chose to do so. It was at the point of trying to launch the three-month opt-out
period that the clinics confirmed their unwillingness to participate.

1.21.

In January 2024, NHS England wrote to inform the Review that it had written to the Chief
Executives and Medical Directors of the NHS trusts that host adult GDCs and GIDS to ask
them to fully cooperate with the University of York in support of the research. Despite
this, the necessary cooperation from the services has not been forthcoming and as a
consequence, the University of York advised that it was not appropriate to begin the next
stage of the study.

1.22.

The Review is disappointed that the study has not progressed to even the first stage during
its lifetime. Despite this setback, it is pleasing that NHS England has stated a clear
commitment to realising the ambitions of this study beyond the life of the Review.

1.23.

The statutory instrument is in place until 2027, and oversight of the study will transfer to
the NHS National Research Oversight Board for Children and Young People’s Gender
Services.

of

